            The National Civil (Code) Act, 2017 (2074)


                           Table of Contents


S.N.                           Contents                       Page
1.1    Part-1      Preliminary
       Chapter-1   Preliminary Statements
       Chapter-2   General Principles of Civil Law
       Chapter-3   Provisions Relating to Civil Rights
1.2    Part-2      Law Relating to Persons
       Chapter-1   Provisions Relating to Natural Persons
       Chapter-2   Provisions Relating to Legal Persons
       Chapter-3   Provisions Relating to Bankruptcy of Natural Persons
1.3    Part-3      Family Law
       Chapter-1   Provisions Relating to Marriage
       Chapter-2   Provisions Relating to Consequences of Marriage
       Chapter-3   Provisions Relating to Divorce
       Chapter-4   Provisions Relating to Relationship of Parents and
Children
       Chapter-5   Provisions Relating to Maternal and Paternal Authority
       Chapter-6   Provisions Relating to Guardianship
       Chapter-7   Provisions Relating to Curatorship
       Chapter-8   Provisions Relating to Adoption
       Chapter-9   Provisions Relating to Inter-country Adoption
       Chapter-10 Provisions Relating to Partition
       Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to Succession




                                    1
1.4   Part-4      Law Relating to Property
      Chapter-1   General Provisions Relating to Property
      Chapter-2   Provisions Relating to Ownership and Possession
      Chapter-3   Provisions Relating to Use of Property
      Chapter-4   Provisions Relating to Cultivation, Possession and
                  Registration of Land
      Chapter-5   Provisions Relating to Government, Public and
                  Community Property
      Chapter-6   Provisions Relating to Trusts
      Chapter-7   Provisions Relating to Usufruct
      Chapter-8   Provisions Relating to Servitudes
      Chapter-9   Provisions Relating to House Rent
      Chapter-10 Provisions Relating to Gift and Donation
      Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to Transfer and Acquisition of
                  Property
      Chapter-12 Provisions Relating to Mortgage of Immovable
                  Property
      Chapter-13 Provisions Relating to Pre-emption of Immovable
                  Property
      Chapter-14 Provisions Relating to Registration of Deeds
      Chapter-15 Provisions Relating to Transactions
1.5   Part-5      Provisions Relating to Contracts and Other
                  Liabilities
      Chapter-1   Provisions Relating to Obligations
      Chapter-2   Provisions Relating to Formation of Contracts
      Chapter-3   Validity of Contracts
      Chapter-4   Provisions Relating to Performance of Contracts



                                   2
      Chapter-5   Provisions Relating to Breach of Contracts and
                  Remedies
      Chapter-6   Provisions Relating to Contracts of Sales of Goods
      Chapter-7   Provisions Relating to Contracts of Guarantee
      Chapter-8   Provisions Relating to Contracts of Bailment
      Chapter-9   Provisions Relating to Contracts of Pledge or Deposit
      Chapter-10 Provisions Relating to Contracts of Agency
      Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to Contracts of Carriage of Goods
      Chapter-12 Provisions Relating to Contracts of Lease
      Chapter-13 Provisions Relating to Hire-purchase Contracts
      Chapter-14 Provisions Relating to Wages
      Chapter-15 Provisions Relating to Indirect or Quasi-Contracts
      Chapter-16 Provisions Relating to Unjust Enrichment
      Chapter-17 Provisions Relating to Torts
      Chapter-18 Provisions Relating to Liability for Defective Products
1.6   Part-6 Provisions Relating to Private International Law




                                   3
     The National Civil (Code) Act, 2017 (2074)
                                                     Date of Authentication:

                                                           16 October 2017

                     Act Number 34 of the year 2017

         An Act Made To Amend And Consolidate Civil Laws

Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make timely the civil provisions
contained in the Country Code and other laws, by also amending and
consolidating such provisions, in order to maintain morality, decency,
etiquette and convenience as well as economic interest of the public by
maintaining law and order in the country and maintain harmonious
relationship between various castes, races and communities, by making just
provisions in the economic, social and cultural fields;

      Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament under clause (1) of
Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act.

                                   Part-1

                                Preliminary

                                 Chapter-1

                            General Provisions

1.   Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
     "National Civil (Code), 2017".

             (2) It shall come into force on 17 August 2018 (first day of the
      month of Bhadra of the year 2075).

2.    Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
      this Act,-


                                      4
           (a)   “court” means the Supreme Court, High Court or
                 District Court, and this term includes a court, other
                 judicial body or authority authorized by law to proceed
                 and adjudicate any specific type of civil cases,

           (b)   "law" means a law in force for the time being,

           (c)    "person" means a natural person and this term includes
                  a legal person,

           (d)    "law-suit" means a statement of claims, and this term
                  includes    any     other   kind      of    complaint,   claim,
                  counterclaim or equivalent petition,

           (e)    “minor” means a child who has not attained eighteen
                  years of age,

           (f)    "Local     Level"       means   the        Rural   Municipality
                  (Gownpalika) or Municipality,

           (g)    "property" means any movable or immovable property,

           (h)    "heir" means a person who is in the order of priority
                  for succession pursuant to Section 239.

3.   Not to prejudice special legal provisions: Where a law in force
     provides a separate provision in any matter regulated by this Act,
     no provision of this Act shall affect such a matter.




                                      5
                                Chapter - 2

                   General Principles of Civil Law

4.   Principles and provisions applicable generally: The principles
     and provisions referred to in this Chapter shall generally be
     applicable to the matters of civil law.

5.   Ignorance of law not to be excused: The ignorance of law shall
     not be excused. Every one shall be presumed to have the knowledge
     of law.

6.   Act against public interest not to be carried out: No one may
     carry out any act in such a manner so that it may be against public
     interest.

7.   Act contrary to law to be invalid: Any act contrary to law shall be
     invalid.

8.   A wrongdoer to bear liability for loss or damage: (1) A       person
     who causes loss or damage to another person by committing a
     wrong while doing, or causing to be done any act shall bear the
     liability for such loss or damage.

            (2)   Every person shall himself or herself bear the
     consequences of any wrongful act committed by him or her.

            (3)   Except as otherwise provided for in this Act or law, the
     concerned person shall bear compensation to perform the liability
     referred to in sub-section (1).

            (4)   Determination of the Compensation shall be as
     provided for in the law.




                                       6
9.    Act causing nuisance to other not to be done: No person shall do,
      or cause to be done, any act that causes nuisance, annoyance or
      damage to prestige, reputation or property of another person.

10.   Not to enjoy benefit of wrong: No person shall be entitled to enjoy
      benefit accrued from his or her own wrong.

11.   Act against interest to be invalid: Any act done against the
      interest of a person who is under one's own guardianship,
      curatorship, subjection or influence or likely be under influence
      shall be invalid.

12.   Personality to be recognized: Every person shall recognize other
      person's personality.

13.   Good neighborhood to be maintained: Every person shall
      maintain so good neighborhood as not to cause damage, loss to the
      community or neighbors of his or her residence.

14.   Not to be relieved from civil liability: No person shall be relieved
      from a civil liability under the law merely on the ground that the
      proceeding of criminal offense is initiated or not initiated against
      him or her.

15.   Custom or tradition contrary to law not to be recognized: No
      custom or tradition contrary to law shall be recognized in the
      dispensation of justice.

16.   Applicable to foreigners as well: Except in cases where the
      subject, context or nature requires application of any legal provision
      only to a Nepali citizen, this Act or other provisions concerning
      civil law shall be equally applicable to a foreigner as well.




                                     7
                               Chapter - 3

               Provisions Relating To Civil Rights

17.   To be equal before law: (1) Every citizen shall be equal before
      law.

             (2)   No citizen shall be deprived of equal protection of law.

18.   Discrimination not to be made: (1) No discrimination shall be
      made in the application of general law on grounds of origin,
      religion, color, caste, race, sex, physical condition, disability,
      condition of health, marital status, pregnancy, economic condition,
      language, region, ideological conviction or on similar other ground.

             (2)   No person shall discriminated in any public and private
      place on grounds of origin, religion, color, caste, race, sex, physical
      condition, disability, condition of health, marital status, pregnancy,
      economic condition, language, region, ideological conviction or on
      similar other ground; and no person shall, on such ground, be
      prevented from using service, amenities or utilities of public use or
      from entering into a public place or public religious place or from
      performing religious act according to his or her will.

             (3)   No person shall be discriminated on ground of sex with
      regard to remuneration and social security for the same work.

             (4)   In appointing any citizen to a governmental or public
      office, he or she shall be appointed only on the basis of the
      qualifications determined by the law. In so appointing, no citizen
      shall be discriminated on grounds of origin, religion, color, caste,
      race, sex, physical condition, disability, condition of health, marital




                                     8
      status,     pregnancy,      economic     condition,   language,   region,
      ideological conviction or similar other ground.

19.   Discrimination not to be deemed where special provision is
      made: Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 17 and 18,
      any special provision made by law for the protection, empowerment
      or development of the citizens that are socially or culturally
      backward women, dalit, indigenous, indigenous nationalities,
      Madhesi, Tharu, Muslims, oppressed class, backward class,
      minorities, marginalized, peasants, workers, youths, children, senior
      citizens, gender and sexual minorities, persons with disabilities,
      pregnant women, the incompetent or helpless, backward region and
      also economically indigent Khash Arya shall not be considered to
      be a discrimination.

20.   Guarantee of freedoms and rights: (1) No person shall be
      deprived of personal liberty except in accordance with law.

            (2)         Every citizen shall, subject to law, have the following
      freedoms and rights:

                  (a)      To express one’s opinion and expression,

                  (b)      To assemble, hold assembly, conference peacefully
                           without arms,

                  (c)      To form union and association,

                  (d)      To move and reside in any part of Nepal,

                  (e)      To practice any profession, employment, industry,
                           business,




                                           9
               (f)    To obtain education of his or her choice or in his or
                      her mother tongue,

               (g)    To earn, use, transfer property and carry out any
                      other transaction of property,

               (h)    To profess and practice his or her religion practiced
                      from time immemorial, subject to the compliance of
                      public morality and traditions,

               (i)    To preserve and promote the language, script or
                      culture of his or her community,

               (j)    To operate a religious place and religious trust, by
                      maintaining independent existence of his or her
                      religious community,

               (k)    To protect or maintain privacy of his or her body,
                      residence, property, document, correspondence or
                      information.

21.   Right to privacy deemed to be violated: (1) If any person
      commits, save in accordance with law, any of the following acts
      without obtaining consent of the concerned person, he or she shall
      be deemed to have violated the right to privacy:

               (a)    Entry into any person’s residence,

               (b)    Opening a person's correspondence or using it,
                      taping or recording or listening the discourse,
                      speech, sound through the medium of telephone or
                      other technology,




                                     10
                  (c)      Watching,       publishing,     broadcasting     or
                           disseminating activities, behaviors of personal life
                           of a person,

                  (d)      Taking figure or photograph of a person,

                  (e)      Imitating other's name, figure, photograph, sound
                           and making the same public.

            (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) or (e)
      of sub-section (1), if a person commits any act referred to in the
      said clauses for literary or artistic purpose or public interest, the
      right to privacy shall not be deemed to have been violated.

22.   Right to make contract: Every citizen shall have the right to make
      a contract subject to the law.

23.   No taxation except in accordance with law: No tax shall be levied
      on and collected from a person’s property or income save in
      accordance with law.

24.   Not to employ in work against will: No person shall be employed
      in a work against his or her will.

25.   Property not to be acquired, requisitioned, auctioned or
      forfeited: (1) The State shall not acquire, requisition, or otherwise
      create any right in, the property of anyone, except in accordance
      with law for the purpose of public interest.

            Provided that this provision shall not apply to a property
      earned illegally.

            (2)         No property of anyone shall be auctioned or forfeited
      except in accordance with law.



                                          11
26.   Complaint may be filed: (1) A person who is arrested or detained
      or any one on his or her behalf may file a petition in the Supreme
      Court, High Court or District Court for the writ of habeas corpus.

            (2)    If a person files a petition in more than one court, the
      petition filed in the higher court shall be maintained.

            (3)    If a person commit or there is sufficient suspicion that
      he or she is going to commit any act in contravention of this
      Chapter, the person aggrieved from such an act may, for the
      enforcement of his or her right, file a petition in the High Court or
      District Court having territorial jurisdiction.

            (4)    If it is found from inquiry into the petition filed
      pursuant to sub-section (1) that the person has been arrested or
      detained against law, the concerned court shall order to release him
      or her immediately.

            (5)    If it is found from inquiry in respect of the petition
      filed pursuant to sub-section (3) that the respondent has caused
      some damage or is about to cause damage to the petitioner's right,
      the concerned court may issue an order requiring the respondent to
      refrain from committing, or causing to be committed, any act
      damaging the petitioner’s right, and where some act has already
      been committed, from committing, or causing to be committed, the
      remaining act, or to do any act.

27.   Compensation to be awarded: (1) If, from the examination of the
      complaint filed pursuant to Section 26, the respondent is found to
      have maliciously committed any act causing damage to the
      complainant, the concerned court shall, having regard to the



                                     12
      circumstances,     order   the        respondent   to   pay   reasonable
      compensation to the complainant.

            (2)      If an official or employee working in a governmental
      or public body is held to have knowingly violated the civil rights
      referred to in this Chapter, such an official or employee shall
      personally bear the amount of compensation referred to in sub-
      section (1).

28.   Compensation for filing false complaint: (1) If a person is held to
      have filed a complaint with the intention of knowingly causing pain
      or loss or damage to a person, the concerned court shall order the
      person so filing the false complaint to pay a reasonable
      compensation to the respondent.

            (2)      The compensation to be awarded under sub-section (1)
      shall include the costs incurred by the respondent for defense before
      the court, court fees and legal practitioner's cost.

29.   Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
      action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit any time in the
      case of arrest or detention, and within a period of six months after
      the date on which such an act or action was done or taken, in the
      other cases.




                                       13
                                   Part - 2

                           Law Relating to Persons

                                 Chapter – 1

                  Provisions Relating to Natural Persons

30.   To be recognized as person: Every person shall, immediately after
      birth, be recognized as a person and be entitled to exercise rights
      under law until he or she survives.

31.   Right to Name: (1) Every person shall, immediately after birth,
      have right to name and be entitled to use the given name
      respectfully.

            (2)       Every person shall have the right to defend his or her
      name, reputation and prestige and such right shall not be
      transferable to others.

            (3)       No person shall be allowed to abuse another’s name.

32.   To attain competency: (1) Every person who attains eighteen
      years of age shall be considered to become a major, and shall, in the
      same capacity, be considered to be legally competent.

            (2)       A person who is competent under sub-section (1) may,
      subject to law, exercise, bear and discharge any right, obligation
      and duty whatsoever.

33.   To be considered incompetent: (1) Notwithstanding anything
      contained in Section 32, a person who has not attained ten years of
      age, or even if attained that age, is unable to protect his or her right
      and interest for the reason of unsoundness of mind shall be
      considered to be legally incompetent.


                                      14
            Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, the term
      "unsoundness of mind" means the condition of being incapable, due
      to physical and mental ill health, of knowing the act done by
      oneself in general understanding and consequences thereof.

            (2)     An incompetent person does not have to bear any type
      of legal obligation, and while exercising a right, it has to be
      exercised, or cause to be exercised, only with the consent of the
      guardian or curator or through the guardian or curator, as the case
      may be.

            (3)     In executing a document on behalf of an incompetent
      person, it shall be executed, or caused to be executed, through his or
      her guardian or curator, as the case may be.

34.   To be considered quasi-competent:           (1) A person who has
      attained ten years of age but not completed eighteen years of age
      shall be considered as a quasi-competent person.

            (2)     A quasi-competent person may, subject to law,
      exercise, bear and discharge any right, obligation and duty
      whatsoever.

            (3)     A quasi-competent person shall, in exercising a right,
      obtain the consent of the guardian or curator or exercise the right
      through the guardian or curator, as the case may be.

            (4)     In executing a document by a quasi-competent person,
      it shall be executed in the presence of his or her guardian or curator,
      as the case may be.




                                     15
35.   To be according to court decision: If a dispute arises about a
      person's competency, incompetency or quasi-competency, it shall
      be settled according to the decision of the court.

36.   Physical examination or change of organ may be made: (1) Any
      person may, subject to law, get his or her body examined, treated or
      transplanted or collected any organ or part or a sample of his or her
      body.

              (2)   If a person is so incapable that he or she cannot express
      his or her consent, his or her guardian or curator, as the case may be,
      for the interest of such a person, carry out, or cause to be carried out,
      the act referred to in sub-section (1).

37.   Power to specify method of one’s cremation, obsequies rites or
      funereal acts: (1) Any person may, while he or she is alive, specify
      the manner of cremation, obsequies rites or funereal acts to be
      carried out after his or her death.

              (2)   If a person has specified the manner of cremation,
      obsequies rites or funereal acts pursuant to sub-section (1), his or
      her successor shall carry out his or her cremation, obsequies rites or
      funereal acts accordingly.

              (3)   If a person has not specified the manner of his or her
      cremation, obsequies rites or funereal acts pursuant to sub-section
      (1), his or her successor shall conduct such person's cremation,
      obsequies rites or funereal acts according to the prevailing custom
      and tradition.

38.   Power to donate corpse or organ: (1) Any person may express in
      writing his or her will to donate, after his or her death, his or her


                                      16
      corpse or any organ of body or any part thereof to a person for the
      purpose of using, or causing to be used, such corpse or organ for a
      particular work.

            (2)    If a person has expressed his or her will pursuant to
      sub-section (1), his or her successor shall use the deceased’s corpse,
      part of the body or a portion thereof according to the will of the
      deceased.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
      if the person accepting such corpse, organ or any part thereof is not
      available or if it is not possible to detach such corpse, organ or any
      part thereof, cremation, obsequies rites or funereal acts of such
      corpse shall be conducted pursuant to Section 37.

39.   To be considered address of residence: (1) If a person's address of
      residence needs to be determined, the address given by him or her
      for that purpose, where he or she has so given, and if not so given,
      the place of his or her permanent residence within Nepal shall be
      considered to be the address of his or her residence.

            (2)    If a person does not have residence or his or her
      residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-section (1), the place of
      his or her abode for the time being shall be considered to be the
      address of his or her residence.

            (3)    If a person does not have a residence or his or her
      residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2) and the
      person has carried on any trade, business, employment or
      transaction, the place where he or she has so carried on trade,




                                    17
      business, employment or transaction shall be considered to be the
      address of his or her residence.

            (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      (2) or (3), where the address of a person's residence is changed, the
      place where he or she is residing for the time being shall be
      considered to be the address of his or her residence.

            (5)    If the residence of an incompetent or quasi-competent
      person needs to be determined, the place of his or her permanent
      residence and if such place is not traced out, the place where his or
      her guardian or curator resides shall be considered to be the address
      of his or her residence.

            (6)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if a person considers any address as the place of his or her
      residence for a particular purpose, such a place shall be considered
      to be the address of his or her residence.

40.   Presumed to be dead: (1) If a person misars without any notice for
      a period of consecutive twelve years or if a person for whom it is
      natural to have information about such disappeared person has not
      received any information about him or her for the last twelve years,
      such a person shall, except in cases where an evidence establishing
      that he or she is alive is received, be deemed to be dead.

            Provided that in the following circumstance, such a person
      shall be deemed to have died after the completion of the following
      period:

                   (1)   In the case of a person having attained eighty
                         years of age, five years,


                                     18
             (2)   In the case of a soldier deputed to war-field, four
                   years after the cessation of the war;

             (3)   In the case of a person traveling by an aircraft,
                   ship or other vehicle that met with an accident,
                   three years after the date of such accident.

      (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3) of
the proviso to sub-section (1), if a person dies in an accident and
there is no evidence of another person meeting with the same
accident to remain alive, such a person also shall be deemed to have
died at the same time.

      (3)    Where more than one person are dead at one and the
same time in an accident, each person so died is deemed, except as
otherwise proved, to have been died at the same time.

      Provided that where, for a particular purpose, a question that
which of the persons died first in such an accident requires to be
settled, the person who was older by age at the time of death shall,
unless otherwise proved, be deemed to have been died first.

      (4)    If the concerned person files a petition stating that any
person has disappeared without a notice or died due to a disaster or
accident and requests for a judicial declaration on such person's
death, disclosing therewith the date, place, cause of death and basis
thereof, the court may, after examining the evidence, make an order
of judicial declaration on the death of such a person.

      (5)    If a person already declared dead pursuant to sub-
section (4) comes back alive and files a petition in person to get the
judicial declaration made earlier to be annulled or if his or her


                              19
      successor files a petition for amendment to the previous judicial
      declaration on death for the reason that the date of death of such
      deceased happened to be different than the date referred to in the
      judicial declaration, the court shall, having examined into this
      matter, annul or amend the judicial declaration made pursuant to
      sub-section (4).

                   Provided that-

                   (1)   Where a living wife has concluded another
                         marriage after such declaration, the matrimonial
                         relationship with the person declared to be dead
                         cannot be re-established.

                   (2)   There shall be no adverse effect on the legal
                         right of the person declared to be dead.

                   (3)   The act that has already been carried out
                         pursuant to the previous judicial declaration shall
                         not be prejudiced by virtue of the establishment
                         of a new date of death.

                   (4)   The right, interest or concern of the person
                         provided by law shall not be affected by any act
                         done or action taken pursuant to clause (3).

41.   Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
      action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit as follows:

            (a)    In the case of the circumstance referred to in Section
                   36, within three months after the date on which such
                   act was done or action taken,




                                    20
(b)   In the case of the circumstance referred to in sub-
      section (5) of Section 40, within one year after the date
      of knowledge of such an act or action,

(c)   In any circumstance other than that referred to in
      clauses (a) and (b), within six months after the date on
      which such an act was done or action taken.




                       21
                                    Chapter-2

                    Provisions Relating to Legal Persons

42.   Legal person to acquire competency: (1) A body corporate
      incorporated pursuant to law shall obtain legal personality, and
      obtain legal competency in the same capacity.

            (2)         In order to obtain legal competency pursuant to sub-
      section (1), any body shall be registered in accordance with law.

            (3)         Except where a separate provision has been made by
      law for registration pursuant to sub-section (2), an application shall
      be made to the competent authority, setting out the following
      matters:

                  (a)      Name of the body corporate,

                  (b)      Head office of the body corporate, and address of
                           such office,

                  (c)      Objectives and functions of the body corporate,

                  (d)      Details of the capital structure, if any, of the body
                           corporate,

                  (e)      Other necessary details.

            (4)         After the registration of a body corporate pursuant to
      sub-section (2), such a body shall be deemed to have been
      incorporated.

           (5)          A legal person shall have a corporate personality and
      use a separate seal for its activities.

           (6)          A body incorporated pursuant to this Section shall be
      an autonomous and body corporate with perpetual succession, and

                                          22
      may, in the same capacity, subject to law, carry out as a person the
      following functions:

                  (a)      To acquire, hold, earn, possess, dispose off, sell or
                           otherwise manage a property,

                  (b)      To execute a contract, exercise rights and discharge
                           obligations under the contract or to assume any kind
                           of right or obligation in any other way,

                  (c)      To frame statute or bye-laws required to operate its
                           own functions, proceedings or business,

                  (d)      To appoint necessary employees based on law to
                           carry out its functions,

                              Provided that the commissions, institutions or
                           bodies referred to in clause (g) of Section 44 shall
                           not be allowed to appoint employees.

                  (e)      To open branches or other offices, subject to its
                           statute and bye-laws,

                  (f)      To open an account in a bank or financial institution
                           and to operate the account,

                  (g)      To carry out other functions according to law.

            (7)         A legal person may sue or initiate other legal action
      and may also be sued or subjected to other legal action by its name.

43.   To obtain legal competency upon incorporation: (1) A legal
      person shall, upon its incorporation, obtain legal competency to
      carry out civil and commercial acts and transactions, in addition to
      the acts mentioned in Section 42.


                                         23
            (2)         The legal competency obtained pursuant to sub-section
      (1) shall continue to exist until the legal person is liquidated,
      dissolved or wounded up in accordance with law.

44.   Legal competency deemed to be acquired, ipso facto:
      Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 42, the following
      body, as a legal person, shall be deemed to have, ipso facto,
      obtained competency:

                  (a)      The State of Nepal,

                  (b)      The Government of Nepal,

                  (c)      The Federal Parliament or Legislature-Parliament,

                  (d)      A   court,    constitutional        body   or   any    office
                           thereunder,

                  (e)      A   Ministry,        Secretariat,    Department       of   the
                           Government of Nepal and any other government
                           office,

                  (f)      A Province,

                  (g)      The Province Government or Provincial level
                           Government offices,

                  (h)      A Provincial Assembly,

                  (i)      A Rural Municipality, Municipality or District
                           Assembly or Local Level government office under
                           such a body,

                  (j)      A commission, committee or similar other body set
                           up in accordance with law by the Government of




                                           24
                        Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level
                        Government,

                  (k)   A corporation, corporate body or body set up in
                        accordance with law,

                  (l)   Any organization established for public purpose
                        such as a shrine, temple, deity place, Chaitya,
                        monastery, mosque, church, public rest house,
                        public inn, and graveyard remained in operation
                        from the time immemorial and in possession of a
                        property,

                  (k)   A   community      school,   college   or   university
                        established for public purpose.

45.   Address of location of legal person: The address of location of a
      legal person shall be as specified at the time of incorporation of the
      body corporate, and where such address is not so specified, the
      address where its headquarters or registered office is located and
      where such office or address also is not specified, the address where
      the main administrative office or transaction and business of such a
      body corporate is located shall be considered to be its address of
      location.

46.   Management and operation of legal person: (1) A legal person
      shall, except as otherwise provided by law, be managed and
      operated in accordance with the provisions set forth in the statute of
      such a person, and where such provisions is not made, it shall be
      managed and operated by one or more directors.




                                      25
            (2)    The legal person shall be responsible for the
      management and operation made by the director or directors
      pursuant to sub-section (1).

47.   Operation of business of legal person: (1) In operating business
      on behalf of a legal person, the business shall, except as otherwise
      provided by law, be operated by the decision of directors of such a
      person.

            (2)    In operating business pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      director may delegate powers to any director or other person to
      operate any business.

48.   Right or liability to devolve upon merger of legal person: (1) If a
      legal person is, for any reason, merged with another legal person,
      the right or liability of such person shall be as specified at the time
      of such merger.

            (2)    If not specified pursuant to sub-section (1), the right or
      liability of the legal person to be merged shall devolve on the legal
      person with which such a person is merged.

49.   Legal person may become agent: A legal person may, subject to
      law, act as an agent of any other person.

50.   Not to participate in decision-making in case of conflict of
      interest: (1) A member or director of any body or institution shall
      not take part in the decision making process on a matter involving
      his or her personal interest.

            (2)    If a decision is affected by the conflict of interest under
      sub-section (1), such a decision shall be void.




                                      26
51.   Legal person to be liable: If a loss or damage is caused to a person
      from an act done and action taken by a person on behalf of a legal
      person, such a legal person shall be liable and bear compensation
      therefor.

            Provided that if any loss is caused by doing an act beyond the
      objective or competency of the legal person or dishonestly, the
      director or a person doing such act shall personally be liable
      therefor.

52.   Assets or liability to be settled: If a legal person is dissolved for
      any reason, the assets and liabilities of such a person shall be settled
      in accordance with law.

53.   Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
      action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
      months after the date of knowledge of such an act or action in the
      cases of Section 50 and within six months after the date on which
      such an act was done or action taken, in the other cases.




                                     27
                                        Chapter-3

        Provisions Relating to Bankruptcy of Natural Persons

54.   Bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated: (1) If a person’s debts
      and other liabilities to be borne by him or her exceed his or her
      assets, bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated for payment or
      recovery of debts or settlement of liabilities from such assets.

            (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      no bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated in the following
      circumstances:

                  (a)         If a person who has regular income or is certain to
                              earn income in the future proves that his or her
                              income can pay or set off debts or other liabilities in
                              a certain period or the creditor is satisfied in such
                              matter,

                  (b)         If a person likely to be a bankrupt asks for a period
                              of up to five years specifying the period of time to
                              repay the debts of creditors and sources thereof
                              from the date of origin of conditions necessitating
                              the commencement of bankruptcy proceedings in
                              order to enjoin or cause to be enjoined from
                              initiating that proceedings,

                  (c)         If the creditor does not agree to initiate, or cause to
                              be initiated, bankruptcy proceedings.

                        Explanation:

                        (1)      For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
                                 "assets" means the concerned person's property

                                            28
                   standing for the time being or to be earned or
                   likely to be earned up to the time prior to the
                   completion of bankruptcy proceedings pursuant
                   to this Chapter.

             (2)   For the purposes of clause (c), the term
                   "creditor" means, where there are more than one
                   creditor, creditors or a group of creditors who
                   hold fifty percent or more debts out of the total
                   debts of the person likely to become bankrupt.

      (3)    If a debt or claim of a creditor is settled from the assets
of a person under this Chapter, such a person shall be deemed to
become a bankrupt.

      (4)    The court shall send the record of the person being
bankrupt    pursuant   to   sub-section    (3)   to   the   bankruptcy
administration office established for that purpose.

      (5)    The bankruptcy administration office shall update the
records referred to in sub-section (4).

      (6)    Any person declared bankrupt pursuant to sub-section
(3) shall not be required to repay debt or fulfill the obligation other
than the debt or obligation he or she has to pay or fulfill and settle
under this Chapter.

      (7)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6),
the following obligation shall be fulfilled from the trade, business
or transaction he or she starts after his or her declaration of being
bankrupt:




                               29
                  (a)   Tax, fee or charge to be paid to the Government of
                        Nepal,     Province     Government     or    Local
                        Government

                  (b)   Amount of penalty or fine to be paid according to
                        the order of a court,

                  (c)   Amount to be paid for the embezzlement of
                        property of the person under his or her
                        guardianship or curatorship,

                  (d)   Amount to be paid for the goods stolen,

                  (e)   Amount to be paid for the embezzlement of
                        property of a trust.

            (8)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if any person becomes bankrupt, he or she may carry on
      any trade, business or transaction other than any act or activity he
      or she is prohibited from doing or taking in that capacity according
      to law.

55.   Petition to be filed to initiate bankruptcy proceedings: (1) A
      person who is likely to become a bankrupt may himself or herself,
      or a creditor or group of creditors having claim of at least twenty-
      five percent or more of the total debts if the amount of debts is
      disclosed and, if the amount of debts is not disclosed, a creditor or
      group of creditors having claim of more than five hundred thousand
      rupees borrowed by such a person, may file a petition in the court,
      in order to initiate bankruptcy proceedings.




                                     30
      (2)    In filing a petition by a person likely to become a
bankrupt for bankruptcy pursuant to sub-section (1), the petition
shall specify the following details:

            (a) Actual statement of his or her total assets and value
                  thereof,

            (b) Statement of total amount of debts borrowed by
                  him or her, interest accrued thereon and details of
                  the creditor or creditors having lent such debts,
                  along with their addresses,

            (c) If he or she has to discharge other liabilities, details
                  thereof,

            (d) The reason for the failure to repay or discharge
                  debts and other liabilities.

      (3)    In filing a petition by a creditor or group of creditors
for bankruptcy pursuant to sub-section (1), the petition shall specify
the following details:

            (a)    Evidence indicating that the borrower is likely to
                   be a bankrupt,

            (b)    Statement of the assets of the borrower and
                   approximate value thereof, to the extent of the
                   petitioner's knowledge,

            (c)    Statement of the petitioner’s claim, and if the
                   petitioner has knowledge of other creditor's debt
                   or claim, such debt or claim,

            (d)    Details including addresses of the creditors.



                                31
            (4)   Prior to filing a petition pursuant to sub-section (1) to
      initiate bankruptcy proceedings, a creditor or group of creditors
      shall give a notice to the borrower indicating that the borrower shall
      repay his or her debts or discharge other liabilities within a period
      of at least three months and that in the event of failure to repay the
      debts within that period, a petition shall be filed in the court to
      initiate bankruptcy proceedings.

56.   Notice to be given to creditor: (1) If a petition is filed by a
      borrower pursuant to Section 55 to initiate bankruptcy proceedings,
      the court shall issue a notice of thirty-five days and serve the same
      on the creditor or group of creditors whose debts the borrower has
      specified as due and payable and publish the notice in any national
      daily newspaper.

            (2)   The notice to be published pursuant to sub-section (1)
      shall also contain a statement inviting any other person having any
      type of claim, if any, over the assets of the person whose assets is
      under bankruptcy proceedings to make a claim with evidence
      within the time-limit as specified in the same sub-section.

            (3)   The claim made within the time-limit referred to in
      sub-section (1) or (2) by the creditor or group of creditors or by
      other person shall be considered to be the final claim made against
      the assets of the borrower, and the bankruptcy proceedings of his or
      her assets shall commence on the same basis.

57.   Notice to be given to borrower: (1) If a petition is filed by a
      creditor or group of creditors pursuant to Section 55 to initiate the
      bankruptcy proceedings of the assets of the borrower, the court
      shall serve a notice, along with a time-limit of thirty-five days, on

                                    32
      the borrower to appear before the court, along with a reply whether
      or not the bankruptcy proceedings require to be instituted, and if
      there exists any ground for not instituting the bankruptcy
      proceedings, and evidence thereof.

            (2)    If a notice is served on the borrower pursuant to sub-
      section (1), a notice shall be given to the other creditor or claimant
      to submit a claim in that respect within a period of thirty-five days
      and such a notice shall be published in any national daily
      newspaper.

            (3)    The claim of a person who fails to submit a claim
      within the period referred to in sub-section (2) shall not be valid
      after that period.

            (4)    The fee to be incurred in publishing a notice in a
      national daily newspaper pursuant to sub-section (2) or sub-section
      (1) of Section 56 shall be recovered from the concerned petitioner.

            (5)    The fee recovered pursuant to sub-section (4) may be
      awarded to be paid by the debtor in the course of bankruptcy.

58.   Order to be given to initiate bankruptcy proceedings: (1) If a
      petition is filed in the court pursuant to Section 55 to initiate the
      bankruptcy proceedings, the court shall make order as to whether it
      would be appropriate to initiate the bankruptcy proceedings in
      respect of that petition or not.

            (2)    If an order is made to initiate the bankruptcy
      proceedings pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall, at the
      request of the person likely to become bankrupt himself or herself
      or of the creditor, order any other family member of such a person


                                         33
      to maintain status quo of the assets of the person in respect of
      whose assets the bankruptcy proceedings are to commence, for the
      purpose of bankruptcy.

            (3)         If the court thinks that the assets of the person likely to
      be bankrupt may be embezzled or may not be properly managed if
      such a person or his or her family member is allowed to manage the
      assets, the court may, on the basis of the petition by the party or suo
      motu, entrust the responsibility for management of such assets to
      any of the following persons:

                   (a) A person licensed as bankruptcy professional
                           pursuant to law,

                   (b) A bankruptcy trustee appointed pursuant to law,

                   (c) The concerned ward committee of the Local Level,

                   (d) Such an officer employee of the court or law
                           practitioner as designated by the court.

            (4)         The Local Level, trustee or person designated pursuant
      to sub-section (3) shall manage the assets of the person likely to
      become bankrupt, in accordance with the order of the court.

59.   Transaction to be, ipso facto, stayed or void: (1) If a court makes
      an order, pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 58, to initiate the
      bankruptcy proceedings in relation to the assets of a person, any of
      the following acts cannot be carried out after the making of such an
      order, and if any of such acts has already commenced or is being
      carried out but not completed, such act shall, ipso facto, be stayed:

                  (a)      To transfer in any manner to any person the title to,
                           bail, pledge, mortgage or to lease or rent in any

                                          34
                           manner for a period exceeding one year, the assets
                           of a person who is likely to become bankrupt,

                  (b)      To attach, or execute the pledge, mortgage of, the
                           assets of the person likely to become bankrupt
                           pursuant to the judgment of a court,

                  (c)      To repay debt or discharge liability of any creditor
                           from the assets of the person likely to be bankrupt.

            (2)         Any deed, contract, dealing, transaction or arrangement
      executed in contravention of the provision set forth in sub-section
      (1) shall, ipso facto be deemed to have been void.

60.   Opportunity to be provided to reconcile sum of debts: (1) If the
      court has made an order to commence the bankruptcy proceedings
      pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 58, the Local Level, trustee or
      person, as the case may be entrusted with responsibility to manage
      property pursuant to sub-section (3) of the same Section shall, after
      the assets, debts and other liabilities of the borrower are ascertained,
      call a meeting of the debtors, creditors or other claimants.

            (2)         In the meeting called pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      creditor or claimant shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity
      to waive his or her claim wholly or partly from all or any of the
      assets of the borrower or to reconcile sum by taking amount lesser
      than his or her claim, by mutual understanding between the person
      likely to become bankrupt and the creditor or other claimant.

            (3)         In making reconciliation of sum pursuant to sub-
      section (2), an arrangement may be so made that a creditor pays the




                                         35
      debt or claim of some or most creditors and submits a lump sum
      claim against such a person.

            (4)         If the parties reach mutual understanding pursuant to
      sub-section (2) or (3) or the concerned parties agree, for any
      reasons, to stay the bankruptcy proceedings for the time being, a
      joint petition may be filed in the court accordingly.

            (5)         If a petition is filed for staying the bankruptcy
      proceedings pursuant to sub-section (4), the court shall make an
      order to stay as requested the bankruptcy proceedings for a period
      not exceeding the period set forth in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
      Section 54.

            (6)         If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (5), the
      bankruptcy proceedings in respect of the assets of such a person
      cannot be instituted until the expiry of that period.

61.   Priority order of paying debt or liability: (1) In carrying out or
      causing to be carried out the bankruptcy proceedings of the assets
      of a person pursuant to this Chapter, the debts to be paid or
      liabilities to be discharged by such a person shall be settled, on the
      basis of the following priority order, from the assets of such a
      person:

                  (a)      Costs incurred in the carrying out of the bankruptcy
                           proceedings,

                  (b)      The liability of the secured creditor, who has
                           provided debt against a pledge or mortgage, to the
                           extent of such pledge or mortgage,




                                          36
                  (c)      Tax, fine to be paid to the Government of Nepal,
                           Province Government or Local Government or
                           other government charges and dues,

                  (d)      Debts of the creditors other than those referred to in
                           clause (b),

                  (e)      Claim of the claimants other than those referred to
                           in clause (b), (c) or (d).

            (2)         In paying or setting off debts or liabilities pursuant to
      sub-section (1), if there are more than one creditor or claimant of
      the same priority order, the debt or claim shall be paid or set off pro
      rata basis from the assets bankrupted in proportion to the debt or
      claim of each creditor or claimant.

            (3) In paying the debts of the secured creditors pursuant to
      clause (b) of sub-section (1), if, after recovery of his or her debts
      from the assets pledged or mortgaged to him or her, there remains
      any portion or sum of such pledge or mortgage, other creditors or
      claimants may make claim over such portion or sum.

            Provided that if the secured creditor's debts cannot be fully
      recovered from such assets, he or she cannot claim other property.

62.   Debt of creditor who shows excess debt not to receive priority:
      Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Section
      61, if it is held that, by a collusion between a person likely to
      become a bankrupt and any creditor, and being guided by a
      malafide motive to cause loss to another creditor or claimant, more
      debts or claims have been shown from any transaction which has
      never happened nor been carried on, the debt or liability of such a


                                          37
      creditor shall be paid or set off only after the debt or liability of
      other creditor or claimant is satisfied.

63.   Property to be set aside: (1) Prior to effecting bankruptcy of the
      assets of a person pursuant to this Chapter, the following property
      shall be set aside and the bankruptcy proceedings shall be carried
      out from the remaining assets:

                 (a)    Any property that remains as the personal property
                        of a person other than one who is likely to become
                        a bankrupt,

                 (b)    Clothes up to three pairs and shoes up to three
                        pairs being worn or to be worn by the person who
                        is likely to become bankrupt and an undivided
                        family member of that person,

                 (c)    One set of cooking and dining utensils, pots and
                        cups, one set of bedding materials and reasonable
                        number of furniture required for the undivided
                        family member of the person likely to become a
                        bankrupt,

                 (d)    Medicines and health-related equipment required
                        to the person likely to become a bankrupt and the
                        undivided family member of that person,

                 (e)    Books necessary to carry out study and teaching,

                 (f)    Food necessary for subsistence for a period not
                        exceeding three months to the persons referred to
                        in clause (b),




                                      38
                   (g)    One set of tools or instruments related to the
                          profession and employment of the persons referred
                          to in clause (b).

             (2)      Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b), (c),
      (d), (e), (f) or (g) of sub-section (1), the total value of the properties
      referred to in these clauses shall not exceed one hundred thousand
      rupees.

64.   Assets not to be concealed: (1) A person who files a petition
      pursuant to Section 55 for commencing the bankruptcy proceedings
      of his or her assets shall submit an exact inventory of his or her
      total assets.

             (2)      In submitting an inventory pursuant to sub-section (1),
      if he or she hides or conceals such assets with mala fide intention of
      causing loss or damage to the creditor, a separate lawsuit may be
      instituted against him or her.

             (3)      If assets are hidden or concealed pursuant to sub-
      section (1), and such assets are discovered before the completion of
      the bankruptcy proceedings, the proceedings referred to in sub-
      section (2) of Section 61 shall be carried out in respect of the
      creditor and the claimant having so discovered the assets and the
      other creditor and claimant as well.

             (4)      If any creditor or claimant discovers any assets
      pursuant to sub-section (3) after the completion of the bankruptcy
      proceedings, ten percent amount of the assets so discovered shall be
      provided to the creditor or claimant who has so discovered the
      assets if such creditor or claimant has already satisfied the sum



                                       39
      according to his or her claim at the time of bankruptcy proceedings,
      and if his or her claim has not been so satisfied, his or her sum shall
      be caused to be satisfied from such assets and the remaining assets
      shall be distributed pursuant to the said sub-section to the other
      creditors and claimants.

            Provided that if the creditor or claimant is the successor or
      relative of the bankrupt person, he or she shall not be entitled to
      such facility.

            (5)    If the assets hidden or concealed pursuant to sub-
      section (2) remain after payment to the creditor or claimant
      pursuant to sub-section (4), such assets shall be returned to the
      concerned person.

65.   Status of bankruptcy to be terminated: (1) The status of a
      bankrupt person falling under bankruptcy shall remain for a period
      of twelve years from the date on which he or she became a bankrupt.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if a bankrupt person pays all liabilities payable to the creditors at
      the time of bankruptcy, he or she may file a petition in the court to
      terminate the status of bankruptcy along with the evidence thereof.

            (3)    The court shall make an order to summon the presence
      of all creditors who were either partially paid or unpaid at the time
      of bankruptcy of such a person within a period of fifteen days,
      excluding the time required for journey, to have a hearing on the
      petition filed pursuant to sub-section (2).

            (4)    If, in hearing the petition filed pursuant to sub-section
      (2), it appears that the bankrupt person has satisfied all the debts


                                     40
      and liabilities remained unpaid at the time of bankruptcy, the court
      may annul the order made at the time of his or her bankruptcy.

            (5)   If an order is annulled pursuant to sub-section (4), the
      status of the bankrupt person shall be deemed have been terminated
      after one year from the date of the annulment of such an order.

66.   Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
      action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit within the
      following period from the date of accrual of the cause of action for
      the commencement of the bankruptcy proceedings:

            (a)   In matters under Section 54, within three years from
                  the date of accrual of the cause of action,

            (b)   In matters under Sections 62 and 64, within two years
                  from the date of knowledge thereof,

            (c)   In the matters other than those referred to in clauses (a)
                  and (b), within six months from the date of
                  commission of such an act or action.




                                    41
                                       Part-3

                                    Family Law

                                     Chapter-1

                         Provisions Relating to Marriage

67.   Marriage deemed to be concluded: If a man and a woman accept
      each other as the husband and wife through any occasion, ceremony,
      formal or other act, a marriage shall be deemed to have been
      concluded.

68.   Marriage to be inviolable social bond: (1) Marriage shall be a
      permanent, inviolable and holy social and legal bond, which is
      based on free consent and established to start conjugal and family
      life between a man and a woman.

            (2)         The marital bond referred to in sub-section (1) shall
      subsist until extinguished pursuant to Section 82.

69.   Freedom of marriage: (1) Every person shall, subject to law, have
      the freedom to conclude a marriage, establish a family and spend a
      conjugal life.

            (2)         A marriage must be made, or caused to be made, public
      irrespective of the manner used to conclude it.

            (3)         Every person's family life shall be inviolable.

70.   Marriage may be concluded: (1) Subject to this Chapter, a
      marriage may be concluded between a man and a woman on the
      following conditions:

                  (a)      If the man and the woman agree to accept each
                           other as husband and wife,


                                         42
                  (b)      If the man and the woman are not relatives,
                           punishable by law on incest,

                  (c)      If matrimonial relationship of both the man and the
                           woman does not exist,

                  (d)      If both have attained twenty years of age.

            (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of
      sub-section (1), nothing shall bar the conclusion, or causing the
      conclusion of, a marriage within the relationship that is allowed to
      marry in accordance with the practices prevailing in their ethnic
      community or clan.

71.   Marriage not to be concluded: (1) No one shall conclude, or cause
      to be concluded, marriage with a man or a woman, as the case may
      be, who is not in a condition where marriage can be concluded
      pursuant to Section 70.

            (2)         No one shall conclude, or cause to be concluded,
      marriage with a man or a woman on any of the following conditions,
      by way of misrepresentation:

                  (a)      One who has contracted human immunodeficiency
                           virus (HIV) or Hepatitis 'B' or similar other
                           incurable severe disease,

                  (b)      One who has already been proved to have no sexual
                           organ, to be impotent or to have no reproductive
                           capability,

                  (c)      One who is dumb or has lost hearing capacity,
                           being fully blind or is suffering from leprosy,



                                         43
                  (d)         One who is of unsound mind,

                  (e)         One who is already a married,

                  (f)         One who is a pregnant,

                  (g)         One who has been convicted of a criminal offense
                              involving moral turpitude by a court and sentenced
                              for the same.

            (3)         A person who is aggrieved from the conclusion of
      marriage by way of misrepresentation pursuant to sub-section (2)
      may get such a marriage voided and claim a reasonable
      compensation from the person who concludes, or causes to be
      concluded, marriage by misrepresentation.

72.   Marriage to be void: (1) A marriage concluded on any of the
      following conditions shall, ipso facto, be void:

                        (a)      A marriage concluded without consent of the
                                 man or the woman,

                        (b)      A marriage concluded between the relatives,
                                 punishable by law on incest.

                        (c) Marriage against Section 70(1) (d).

                        (d) Another marriage concluded by a man or woman
                                 whilst the current marital relationship is still
                                 prevalent except in the situation of being
                                 separated by taking partition according to law.

            (2)         A marriage concluded pursuant to sub-section (1) shall
      be invalid ab initio.




                                              44
            (3)         Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of
      sub-section (1), a marriage concluded pursuant to sub-section (2) of
      Section 70 shall not be void.

73.   Voidable marriage: (1) If a marriage is concluded in any of the
      following circumstances and any person who concludes such a
      marriage does not accept it, the person may get such a marriage
      voided:

                  (a)      Deleted

                  (b)      If the marriage has been concluded, or caused to be
                           concluded, by way of misrepresentation pursuant to
                           sub-section (2) of Section 71.

            (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      a marriage shall be void only with the consent of the woman if she
      is pregnant or has delivered a baby as the consequence of the
      marriage.

74.   Marriage to be deemed concluded if child is born from physical
      intercourse: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
      (2) of Section 69, if a woman is proved to have delivered a child by
      conceiving pregnancy from physical intercourse with a man,
      marriage between such a man and a woman shall, ipso facto, be
      deemed to have been concluded.

            (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      no marriage shall be deemed to have been concluded between a
      man and a woman in any of the following circumstances even if a
      child is born from physical intercourse with the man:




                                         45
                  (a)   If a woman gives birth to a child by conceiving
                        pregnancy as the consequence of rape,

                  (b)   Except in case of the relationship of under sub-
                        section (2) of Section 70, if a woman delivers a
                        child by conceiving pregnancy from a physical
                        intercourse with a man within the relationship
                        punishable by law on incest.

                  (c) If the age of marriage is not complete according to
                        part (d) of subsection 1 of section 70.

                  (d) If there is situation which causes polygamy.

75.   No lawful rights of child already born to be prejudiced: There
      shall be no prejudice in the lawful rights of a child already born
      from a marriage if the marriage becomes void pursuant to Section
      72 or the marriage is got voided pursuant to Section 73 or of the
      child born in any of the circumstance referred to in sub-section (2)
      of Section 74.

76.   Marriage to be registered: (1) Both husband and wife shall get
      their marriage registered by filing an application in the authority
      appointed as per law.

            Provided that in the circumstance referred to in sub-section
      (1) of Section 74, both or either of husband and wife may file an
      application for the registration of marriage.

            (2)    A husband and wife residing outside Nepal may file an
      application for the registration of marriage in the Nepali embassy or
      consulate general located in the country in which they have been
      residing.


                                     46
      (3)    If an application is filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2) for the registration of a marriage, the concerned authority shall,
after registering the marriage in the marriage book maintained in
the office, issue the marriage registration certificate, in the form
according to prevailing laws, to the applicant, within fifteen days of
the filing of the application.

      Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"concerned authority" means the marriage registering authority.

      (4)    If the marriage cannot be registered according to the
application filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the concerned
authority shall give the applicant information, specifying the
reasons therefor, within seven days of the filing of the application.

      (5)    If any one party does not appear for the registration of
a marriage according to the application filed pursuant to the proviso
to sub-section (1), the concerned authority shall register the
marriage after inquiring into such a party.

      (6)    If, in making inquiry pursuant to sub-section (5), the
other party expresses disagreement to the registration of marriage,
the concerned authority shall not register the marriage and inform
the applicant that the decision on that matter shall be made as
decided by the court.

      (7)    The concerned authority shall safely maintain the
records of the details of the registration of marriage under this
Section.

      (8)    If a couple who have already concluded marriage prior
to the commencement of this Act but have not registered the


                                 47
      marriage may, if they so desire, get their marriage registered
      pursuant to this Section.

            Provided that the marriage of such a couple shall not be
      deemed to be legally invalid merely for the reason that such
      marriage is not registered.

77.   Marriage by registration: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
      in sub-section (2) of Section 69 and Section 74, if a man and a
      woman desire to conclude marriage by registration, they shall file
      an application in the concerned District Court, if they are in Nepal,
      and in the Nepali embassy or consulate general, if they are outside
      Nepal, specifying therein their name, surname, age, address,
      profession, name of their father, mother, grand-father, grand-mother,
      whether previously married or not, if married, the details of the
      dissolution of marriage and also the name of at least two witnesses.

            (2)    In order to file an application pursuant to sub-section
      (1), either the man or the woman or both must have resided since at
      least fifteen days ago in the concerned district if the application has
      to be filed in the District Court, and, if the application is to be filed
      in the embassy or consulate general, in the country in which such an
      embassy or a consulate general is situated.

78.   Decision to be made as to whether marriage is capable of being
      concluded: (1) If an application is filed pursuant to Section 77 for
      the conclusion of a marriage by registration, the concerned
      authority shall make, after making necessary inquiry, a decision
      within seven days of the filing of the application, as to whether or
      not the marriage is capable of being concluded.



                                      48
            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if the concerned authority based in a foreign country has suspicion
      about the proposed marriage, the authority shall submit the matter
      to the Government of Nepal and settle the matter according to the
      decision of the Government of Nepal.

79.   Deed of consent to be prepared: If a decision is made pursuant to
      Section 78 to the effect that marriage is capable of being concluded
      between the applicants, the concerned authority shall prepare a deed
      of consent for marriage, also recording the matters specified in the
      application and a statement to the effect that the parties to the
      marriage have consented to accept each other as husband and wife,
      cause the contracting parties and witnesses present to affix their
      signature and thumb impression on the deed in his or her presence
      and also sign the deed.

80.   Provisions relating to registration of marriage: (1) After the
      deed of consent has been signed pursuant to Section 79, the
      concerned authority shall register such a marriage in the registration
      book, which has to be signed by such an authority and also by the
      parties to the marriage and witnesses present.

            (2)    Once the marriage is registered pursuant to sub-section
      (1), the concerned authority shall issue a marriage registration
      certificate, in the form according to prevailing laws, to the parties to
      the marriage registration.

            (3)    Marriage shall be deemed to have been concluded
      between the applicants from the date on which the marriage
      registration certificate is obtained pursuant to sub-section (2).



                                     49
81.   Provision relating to use of surname by married woman: (1) A
      married woman may, after marriage, use the surname used by her
      father or mother or the surname of her husband or both the
      surnames.

            (2)   If a question arises as to the surname of a married
      woman, except as otherwise proved, she shall be deemed to have
      used the surname of her husband.
            (3)   If the marriage of a woman who has used the surname
      of her husband is dissolved, she may, if she so desires, use the
      surname used by her father or mother.
82.   Matrimonial relationship deemed to be terminated: In any of the
      following circumstances, the matrimonial relationship between the
      husband and the wife shall be deemed to have been terminated:
            (a)   If marriage is annulled pursuant to Section 72 or 73,
            (b)   If marriage is dissolved according to law between
                  husband and wife,
            (c)   If the wife concludes another marriage before effecting
                  divorce pursuant to law.
83.   Re-marriage may be concluded: Notwithstanding anything
      contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a man or a woman may re-
      marry in any of the following circumstances:
            (a)   If the matrimonial relationship between husband and
                  wife is terminated pursuant to Section 82,
            (b)   If husband or wife dies,
            (c)   If husband and wife are separated upon partition in
                  accordance with law.




                                   50
84.   Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
      action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
      months after the date on which such act was done or action taken.




                                   51
                                Chapter-2

          Provisions Relating to Consequences of Marriage

85.   To be considered husband and wife: After the conclusion of
      marriage between a man and a woman, they shall, so long as such
      matrimonial relationship subsists, be considered each other's
      husband and wife.

86.   Relation and obligation of husband and wife: (1) The husband
      and wife must have mutual love and good faith.

            (2)     The husband and wife must establish and spend
      conjugal life by living together, except as otherwise arranged
      through mutual understanding.

            (3)     The husband and wife must help, protect and respect
      each other.

87.   Husband's home to be considered residence: Except where a
      separate residence is fixed by mutual understanding of the husband
      and wife, the husband's home shall be considered to be the wife’s
      residence.

88.   To be considered each other's agent: Except as otherwise
      provided for in the law or except where there is a legal dispute
      between the husband and wife, the husband and wife shall be
      considered as each other's agent in the general household affairs.

89.   To provide, or cause to be provided, maintenance in accordance
      with reputation: The husband and wife shall provide, or cause to
      be provided, maintenance cost and health care to each other
      according to their reputation and capacity.



                                    52
90.   Household affairs to be managed by consent: (1) The husband
      and wife of an undivided family shall manage the household affairs
      by mutual consent according to their property, income and capacity.

               (2)   Except as otherwise provided in the law, the husband
      or wife shall obtain each other's consent in selling or otherwise
      transferring a property registered in his or her name.

91.   Not to preclude from exercising profession, business or
      occupation: The husband or wife or any member of the family
      shall not preclude each other from exercising a profession, business
      or occupation of their respective skill, qualification or ability.

92.   Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
      action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
      months after the date on which such an act was done or action was
      taken.




                                      53
                                Chapter-3

                      Provisions Relating to Divorce

93.   Divorce may be effected by consent of both: If both the husband
      and wife so desire, they may divorce the relationship of husband
      and wife at any time.

94.   Husband may effect divorce: The husband may effect divorce in
      any of the following circumstances even without consent of the
      wife:

              (a)   Except where the husband and wife are living
                    separately after obtaining their partition share or
                    separating bread and board in accordance with law, if
                    the wife has been living separately for three or more
                    consecutive years, without consent of the husband,

              (b)   If the wife deprives the husband of maintenance costs
                    or expels him from the house,

              (c)   If the wife commits an act or conspiracy likely to cause
                    the grievous hurt or other severe physical or mental
                    pain to the husband,inher

              (d)   If the wife is proved to have made sexual relation with
                    another person.

95.   Wife may effect divorce: The wife may effect divorce in any of the
      following circumstances, even without consent of the husband:

              (a)   Except where the husband and wife are living
                    separately after obtaining their partition share or
                    separating bread and board in accordance with law, if



                                      54
                    the husband has been living separately for three years
                    or more consecutively, without consent of the wife,

              (b)   If the husband deprives the wife of maintenance costs
                    or expels her from home,

              (c)   If the husband commits an act or conspiracy likely to
                    cause grievous hurt or other severe physical or mental
                    pain to the wife,

              (d)   If the husband concludes another marriage,

              (e)   If the husband is proved to have made sexual
                    intercourse with another woman,

              (f)   If the husband is proved to have raped the wife.

96.   Petition to be filed for divorce: The husband or wife, as the case
      may be, desiring to get the relationship divorced shall file a petition
      in the concerned district court.

97.   Mediation to be made between husband and wife: If a petition is
      filed for divorce pursuant to Section 96, the court shall, to the
      extent possible, remind and convince both the parties and conciliate
      them.

98.   Divorce to be effected: If the court fails to make conciliation
      between the husband and wife even after reminding and convincing
      them pursuant to Section 97 and deems appropriate to get the
      relationship divorced rather than to continue it any longer, the court
      shall effect divorce between them.

              Provided that if the husband and wife do not agree to
      conciliate between them despite being reminded and convinced by



                                        55
      the court to that effect, the court shall effect divorce after one year
      of the filing of the petition.

99.   Partition of property to be effected before divorce: (1) If divorce
      is to be effected because of the husband, the concerned court shall,
      if the wife so demands, cause partition to be effected between the
      husband and wife before effecting divorce.

            (2)    If a petition is filed by the wife for divorce on the
      ground referred to in clause (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) of Section 95,
      divorce is deemed to be effected because of the husband, for the
      purposes of sub-section (1).

            (3)    If a property in common is registered in the name of
      both husband and wife or either of them, then such property shall be
      partitioned between them according to law, prior to effecting
      divorce.

            (4)    If the husband himself has not obtained partition from
      his father or other coparceners, the court shall, by causing both the
      parties to disclose the coparceners, and if there are other
      coparceners who are entitled to partition, by inquiring such
      coparceners as well, cause partition to be apportioned between the
      husband and wife.

            (5)    If it appears that it may take a long time to effect
      partition pursuant to sub-section (1), (3) or (4), the court may effect
      divorce between the husband and wife and order the husband to
      provide the wife with monthly expenses as alimony according to the
      property and income of the husband until the partition is effected.




                                       56
              Provided that if such a woman concludes another marriage
     before effecting partition, she shall not be entitled to a partition
     share.

              (6)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if a petition is filed for divorce on the ground referred to in
     clause (b), (c) or (d) of Section 94, the husband shall not be
     compelled to provide partition share or alimony to the wife
     pursuant to this Chapter.

100. Order to pay lump sum amount or alimony: Notwithstanding
     anything contained in Section 99, if the wife who effects divorce
     desires to obtain from the husband a lump sum amount or annual or
     monthly alimony or expense, instead of the partition share, the
     court may order the husband to provide such a wife with a lump
     sum amount or annual or monthly alimony or expense on the basis
     of his property or income.

              Provided that if such a wife concludes another marriage, it is
     not required to provide such amount or alimony.

101. Order to provide maintenance costs: If the wife, who has not
     obtained partition from the husband for there being no property for
     partition under Section 99, desires to receive maintenance costs
     from the husband and the husband has income, the Court may order
     the husband to provide maintenance costs to the wife according to
     the income of the divorced husband.

     Provided that:

              (1)   If such a wife concludes another marriage, it is not
                    required to provide such costs,


                                     57
           (2)    If the income of the wife is higher than that of the
                  husband, it is not required to provide such costs.

102. To be according to agreement: Notwithstanding anything
     contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if there exists a written
     agreement between the husband and wife on the partition share or
     alimony to which the wife is entitled upon divorce, it shall be
     according to such agreement.

           Provided that no agreement which is against the interest of a
     minor may be made.

103. Previous child or husband to obtain property: On the death of a
     divorcee woman, her son, daughter, if any, shall be entitled to her
     property, and if not, the previous husband shall obtain the property
     received by her from such a husband, and the successor on her
     mother's side shall obtain the other property.

104. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
     action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
     months after the date of accrual of the cause of action or knowledge
     of such an act or action.




                                    58
                               Chapter-4

 Provisions Relating to Relationship of Mother, Father and Son and
                                Daughter

105. Maternity or paternity to be determined from mother or father:
     (1) If it is required to determine a person's maternity or paternity, it
     shall be determined on the basis of his or her mother or father, as
     the case may be.

           (2)    In determining paternity pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the person who was the husband of his or her mother at the time of
     birth of such a person shall be presumed, unless otherwise proved,
     to be a father of such a person.

106. Child presumed to be born from married husband: Unless
     otherwise proved, a child born in any of the following
     circumstances shall be presumed to be born from the married
     husband:

           (a)    Born after one hundred eighty days from the date on
                  which the marriage was concluded,

           (b)    Born within two hundred seventy-two days from the
                  date on which the husband died or divorce was effected.

107. Paternity may be denied: (1) Except as otherwise agreed upon
     between the husband and wife, the paternity of a child born to the
     wife before one hundred eighty days of the conclusion of marriage
     may be denied by the husband and by the successor to the husband
     where the husband had already died before the birth of such child.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     where a man concludes marriage with a woman with knowledge or

                                    59
      having reasonable ground to know that she was pregnant before the
      marriage, the paternity of a child cannot be denied merely on the
      ground of his or her birth before that period.

108. Son, daughter or paternity to be claimed: (1) If a child whose
      paternity or maternity is not determined has to be claimed as one's
      own son or daughter, such claim shall be made within a period of
      two years of the child being born or being identified.

            (2)    In claiming the paternity of a child born without the
      paternity being identified, a claim shall be made within a period of
      two years of the birth of such child.

            Provided that no claim may be entertained if such child is
      already dead.

109. Paternity of child born from artificial insemination to be of
      father: A child born from the use, with consent of the husband and
      wife, of artificial insemination system from semen of another
      person shall be considered to have been born from the married
      husband and his or her paternity shall be determined accordingly.

110. To be according to court's decision: If there arises a dispute as to
      the maternity or paternity of a person, its settlement shall be as
      decided by the Court.

111. To obtain name and surname: (1) Each person shall, after birth,
      obtain the name as designated by his or her mother or father
      according to his or her religion, culture, usage or tradition.

            (2)    If the mother or father of a person is not available for
      the time being or is not likely to be so available, the person shall




                                     60
     obtain the name as designated by the guardian or curator taking care
     of (herchaha) him or her.

           (3)     Each person shall, after birth, be entitled to use after
     his or her name the surname designated with the consent of his or
     her father and mother or failing such consent, the surname of his or
     her father.

           Provided that a person whose paternity is not traced out shall
     be entitled to use after his or her name the surname of his or her
     mother.

           (4)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
     a person may, if he or she so wishes, use the surname of his or her
     father or mother or of both.

           (5)     If a dispute arises as to the surname of a person, he or
     she shall be considered, unless otherwise proved, to have used the
     surname of his or her father.

           (6)     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, a person whose both father and mother are not traced out
     shall be entitled to use after his or her name the surname given by
     the guardian taking care of (herchaha) him or her.

112. Name of mother, father, grand-father and grand-mother may
     be mentioned: (1) If the name of mother, father and grand-father,
     grand- mother is required by law to be mentioned in a formal act,
     legal act and proceeding or deed, any person shall be entitled to
     mention the name of his or her mother, father and grand-father,
     grand-mother.




                                     61
            (2)    If the father of a person who has to mention the name
      of his or her mother, father and grand-father, grand-mother pursuant
      to sub-section (1) is not traced out, the person may mention the
      name of his or her mother and the mother's grand-father, grand-
      mother, and even where the mother's name is not traced out, it shall
      be sufficient to mention, setting out that matter, the name of the
      guardian or curator if he or she is a minor, and only his or her name
      if he or she is a major.

113. Birth of son, daughter to be registered: (1) If a son or daughter is
      born to a couple, the mother or father shall file an application,
      within three months of the birth of such a son or a daughter, before
      the authority specified according to law, for the birth registration.

            (2)    If one intends to file an application for the registration
      of a son or a daughter after the expiry of the time-limit referred to
      in sub-section (1), such fee as specified according to prevailing
      laws shall be charged.

            (3)    If an application is filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or
      (2), the concerned authority shall, after entering the details in the
      birth register maintained in the office, issue a certificate of birth
      registration in the form as specified by the law to the applicant.

            (4)    The details to be entered in the register under sub-
      section (3) shall include the concerned person's name, surname,
      date of birth (year, month, instant and day as well) and place of
      birth, and the name, surname and address of his or her mother,
      father and grand-mother and grand-father, as well.




                                     62
           (5)         The concerned authority shall forward the details
     entered, pursuant to sub-section (3), in the register maintained in
     the office up to the last day of every month to the District
     Administration Office, within a period of fifteen days of the first
     month thereafter and the said Office shall also enter such details up
     to the end of every month in the birth register maintained in the
     office for that purpose and forward the same in every three months
     to the Ministry specified by the Government of Nepal by a
     notification in the Nepal Gazette.

           (6)         The concerned Ministry shall enter the details received
     pursuant to sub-section (5) in the birth register maintained for that
     purpose and maintain up-dated details each year.

114. Obligation to care (herchaha) and maintain(shyahar samhar):
     (1) The mother and father shall jointly care and maintain their every
     minor.

           (2)         In caring and maintaining pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the father and mother shall provide for maintenance, health care,
     education,        sports   and   entertainment   and    other   necessary
     arrangements, according to their financial condition and capability.

115. To be under custody of mother or father: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained in Section 114, if matrimonial relationship
     between a husband and wife is extinguished in accordance with law,
     a minor born from them shall remain in the custody of the mother
     or the father as provided herein below:

                 (a)      In the case of a minor who has not attained five
                          years of age, under the custody of the mother, if she



                                        63
                     so desires irrespective of whether or not she has
                     concluded another marriage,

            (b)      In the case of a minor above five years of age,
                     except where the mother has concluded another
                     marriage, under the custody of the mother, if she so
                     desires,

            (c)      In the circumstance other than that referred to in
                     clause (a) or (b), under the custody of the father.

      (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where the husband and wife have entered a separate agreement on
the custody of a minor at the time of divorce or judicial separation,
the agreement shall apply to the custody of the minor.

      (3)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
while deciding as to which of the father and the mother has the
custody of a minor above ten years of age, the opinion of the
concerned minor may also be obtained.

      (4)         Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the mother or father, under whose custody a minor is
living, dies, the surviving father or mother shall take the minor
under his or her custody without any delay.

      Provided that if the mother has already concluded another
marriage, she is not obliged to take a minor above five years of age
under her custody.

      (5)         Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the husband and wife, who get separated in accordance
with law, have a minor, the maintenance, education and heath care


                                   64
     of such a minor shall be according to the agreement concluded, if
     any, between the husband and wife in that respect, and in the
     absence of such an agreement, it shall be as follows:

                 (a)      In the case of a minor below five years of age, the
                          minor shall be under the mother's custody,

                 (b)      In the case of a minor who is of five years of age or
                          above five but below ten years of age, the minor
                          shall be under the father’s custody,

                 (c)      In case of a minor having attained ten years of age,
                          the minor shall be under the mother’s or the father’s
                          custody, with whom the minor desires to live.

116. Obligation to take necessary care (herchaha) and provide
     maintenance (shyahar samhar): (1) The father or mother, as the
     case may be, who takes the custody of a minor pursuant to Section
     115, shall take care of and maintain such minor, and, in so taking
     care of and maintaining the minor, the father or mother, as the case
     may be, shall do so in accordance with the provisions referred to in
     sub-section (2) of Section 114.

           (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if the income of the father or mother who does not take the custody
     of a minor is higher than that of the father or mother who takes the
     custody of the minor, such a mother or a father shall provide such a
     minor with such expenses, for the purpose of maintenance,
     education and treatment of the minor, as agreed upon between such
     father and mother and in the absence of such agreement, as
     specified by the court.



                                        65
117. Facility of visit to be provided: (1) In cases where matrimonial
     relationship is extinguished or the mother or father are living
     separately in accordance with law, the minor shall be allowed to
     visit, from time to time, the father if he or she is living under the
     mother’s custody and the mother if he or she is living under the
     father’s custody, or with the consent of the mother and father, to
     stay with either of them for some time.

             Provided that if it appears that the interest of the minor is
     likely to be prejudiced in availing the facility of such visit or stay,
     the concerned court may issue an order prohibiting such visit or
     stay.

             (2)   The frequency of visit to, or the period of stay with, the
     father or the mother, as the case may be, pursuant to sub-section (1),
     shall be as fixed by the concerned mother and father and, in the
     absence of such fixation, shall be as ordered by the concerned court.

             (3)   If a minor is living with his father or mother pursuant
     to this Section, the father or mother taking the custody of the minor
     shall take care of and maintain him or her in accordance with sub-
     section (2) of Section 114.

118. Rights of son, daughter remain to exist: (1) Notwithstanding the
     matrimonial relationship between the husband and wife is
     extinguished pursuant to this Chapter, the legal rights of the son,
     daughter born from them vis-à-vis the father, mother and the
     obligation of the father, mother vis-à-vis him or her shall remain in
     existence.




                                     66
           (2)         In spite of the father and mother of a person being
     incapable of becoming husband and wife in accordance with this
     Act, the legal rights of the son, daughter born from them vis-à-vis
     the father, mother and the obligation of the father, mother vis-à-vis
     him or her shall remain in existence.

119. Prohibition on living separately without consent: (1) A son,
     daughter shall not, without consent of his or her father or mother,
     live separately from his or her father or mother.

           (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     a son, daughter may live separately from his or her father, mother in
     the following circumstance:

                 (a)      If he or she is separated from his or her father,
                          mother,   with     or   without   obtaining   partition
                          according to law,

                 (b)      If he or she concludes marriage,

                 (c)      If he or she attains at least twenty one years of age,
                          or

                 (d)      If he or she is already employed.

120. Minor not to work as labor: A minor who is allowed to be
     engaged in a work as a labor according to law cannot work as a
     labor without consent of the mother, father, other guardian or
     curator.

121. Decision of father, mother taking custody of minor to prevail: If
     there arises a dispute between the father and mother, who cannot
     conclude marriage between them or whose matrimonial relationship
     is extinguished pursuant to this Act, on any matter to be decided in

                                        67
     respect of the right and interest of a minor born from such father
     and mother, the decision made by the father or mother, as the case
     may be, with whom such a minor is living shall prevail.

122. Son or daughter to honor, respect and care (herchaha) mother,
     father: (1) Every son or daughter shall treat his or her mother,
     father with honor and respect.

           (2)   Every son or daughter shall, according to his or her
     financial and social status, provide necessary care, maintenance,
     medical treatment or attention to his or her mother, father,
     notwithstanding living in an undivided family or separately in
     accordance with law.

123. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
     action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within the
     specific statute of limitation, if any, provided in this Chapter for
     making such lawsuit, and within six months after the date on which
     such an act was done or action taken, in the other circumstances.




                                      68
                                   Chapter-5

                Provisions Relating to Parental Authority

124. To be under supervision and control of father and mother: (1)
     A minor son, daughter shall live under the supervision, oversight,
     control or authority of their father and mother.

           (2)         A minor living under sub-section (1) shall obey lawful
     order or direction given by his or her father, mother.

125. Parental authority to be exercised jointly: (1) The mother and
     father shall, jointly and with their mutual consent, exercise such
     authority over, fulfill such responsibility and duty towards, their
     son and daughter as required to be exercised and fulfilled under this
     Chapter.

           (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the following mother or father, as the case may be, shall, in the
     following circumstance, exercise such authority and fulfill such
     responsibility and duty as to be exercised and fulfilled pursuant to
     the said sub-section:

                 (a)      If either of the father and mother dies, the surviving
                          mother or father,

                 (b)      If either of the mother and father is of unsound
                          mind, the mother or father of sound mind, during
                          the period of existence of such state of mind,

                 (c)      If the matrimonial relationship between the mother
                          and father is dissolved or they have been living
                          separate according to law, the mother or father who
                          has taken the custody of the minor,

                                        69
              (d)    If the father of a minor is not traced out, the mother.

126. Rights, responsibilities and duties of person exercising maternal
     and parental authority: The rights, responsibilities and duties of
     the father or mother who is entitled to exercise the parental
     authority pursuant to this Chapter shall be as follows:

              (a)    To keep the minor with him or her, provide
                     company to the minor and watch the minor's works,
                     actions and behaviors,

              (b)    To provide food and clothes and to teach him or her
                     to eat, wear and labor,

              (c)    To provide affection, fondness and love,

              (d)    To inculcate in him or her social dignity, decency,
                     morals, rites, culture, customs and to educate him or
                     her to behave accordingly;

              (e)    To provide moral education based on social values
                     such as honesty, self-confidence, self-reliance,
                     integrity, labor and discipline,

              (f)    To vigil physical and mental health, to provide and
                     cause to be provided medical treatment,

              (g)    To provide opportunity, according to necessity, for
                     sports and entertainment,

              (h)    To make available read-worthy and message-
                     oriented educational materials,

              (i)    To guide to remain loyal to the family, society,
                     community, nation and state,


                                   70
                 (j)      To prevent from bad habits, bad association and
                          obscene matter,

                 (k)      To teach to obey order, honor and revere,

                 (l)      To do, or cause to be done, such other act
                          whatsoever as may be required for the development
                          of physical, mental and intellectual personality.

127. Prohibition on discrimination: The mother or father shall not
     make discrimination between their children, in any manner, in the
     maintenance, education and upbringing, sports, medical treatment,
     entertainment, facility or household work of their children on the
     ground of son or daughter or between sons or between daughters.

128. Special care (herchaha) to be taken: (1) If any son or daughter
     is physically or mentally handicapped or disabled or has contracted
     a deadly disease such as human immune-deficiency virus (HIV) or
     Hepatitis B, the mother, father shall take special care of, and
     provide special treatment and protection to, such a son or a
     daughter.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     "physically or mentally handicapped" means a physically or
     mentally impaired person who himself or herself is unable or
     incompetent to carry out daily work.

           (2)         In order to make the son or daughter as referred to in
     sub-section (1) financially self-reliant in the future by having
     arrangements for providing special medical treatment, the mother
     and father shall make, according to their financial condition and




                                        71
     capacity, arrangements for imparting special education or training
     to such son or daughter.

129. Power to cause minor to improve conduct and habit: If the
     mother or father consider it necessary to make the minor, who is
     under their supervision, oversight, control or authority pursuant to
     this Chapter, improve his or her behavior, habit, conduct and
     character, they may do such acts as they think appropriate vis-à-vis
     such a minor and make him or her improve his or her behavior,
     habit or conduct.

           Provided that the minor shall not be subjected to any
     treatment that entails physical or mental pain.

130. Authority deemed to be provided to exercise right: If the mother
     and father appoint a teacher for the education and upbringing of
     their son or daughter or admits the child into an educational
     institute for any kind of education, the teacher so appointed or the
     headmaster or teacher of such an institute shall be deemed to have
     been given the authority to exercise the rights as referred to in
     Section 129 in respect of education and upbringing.

131. Guardian or curator may also exercise parental authority: If a
     minor is living with the guardian or curator for the reason that both
     of his or her mother and father have died or disappeared or his or
     her mother has concluded another marriage following the death of
     his or her father or both of his or her mother and father have
     become of unsound mind, his or her guardian or curator, as the case
     may be, may exercise such paternal authority and fulfill such
     responsibilities and duties as required to be exercised and fulfilled
     by the mother and father under this Chapter.

                                   72
132. Power to restrict parental authority: (1) If a complaint is filed by
      a person or a child welfare organization incorporated pursuant to
      law specifying that a person who is entitled to exercise the paternal
      authority pursuant to this Chapter has committed any of the
      following acts against a minor and, if the allegation is proved from
      an inquiry into the matter, the court may prevent such a person from
      exercising such authority:

               (a)    Subjecting a minor to cruel, inhumane or torturous
                      punishment or treatment,

               (b)    Neglecting, disregarding or abusing the minor from
                      time to time,

               (c)    Engaging a minor in an immoral or sexual
                      profession,

               (d)    Employing a minor in a work likely to endanger the
                      body, life or health,

               (e)    Causing loss and damage to a minor’s property by
                      spending it against his or her interest or selling such
                      property to others with the intention of taking it
                      subsequently,

               (f)    Compelling a minor to abandon family life by
                      making him or her a Sanyasi, fakir, monk, nun,
                      Paschar or in similar other way,

               (g)    Engaging a minor in begging, except while
                      observing a religious or cultural rite,




                                      73
                  (h)      Causing a minor to do any other act constituting an
                           offense under law.

            (2)         If a restriction is imposed pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the court shall appoint a guardian according to law, authorizing him
     or her to exercise the parental authority in respect of such a minor.

            (3)         If the guardian is appointed to exercise the parental
     authority pursuant to sub-section (2), such a guardian may exercise
     the parental authority under this Chapter in consonance with the
     interests of the minor.

            (4)         If the person, who is prevented from exercising the
     parental authority pursuant to sub-section (1), makes a petition in
     the Court, making an undertaking not to repeat the act referred to in
     the said sub-section, the court may lift the restriction imposed on
     him or her and revoke the appointment as referred to in sub-section
     (2).

133. Termination of parental authority: (1) The parental authority
     which the mother and father are entitled to exercise over their son
     or daughter child pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to have
     been terminated in any of the following circumstances:

                  (a)      If the son or daughter attains eighteen years of age,

                  (b)      If the son or daughter lives separately after getting
                           an employment.

                                    Provided that where any son or daughter is
                              physically or mentally handicapped, the parental
                              authority over him or her shall, except in cases




                                         74
                       where he or she lives separately by concluding
                       marriage, not be terminated.

134. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
     action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
     months after the date on which such an act was done or action was
     taken.




                                 75
                                    Chapter-6

                   Provisions Relating to Guardianship

135. To be considered guardian: A person who is appointed or liable
     under this Chapter to protect the person, protection of rights and
     interest of an incompetent or quasi-competent person shall be
     considered to be a guardian.

136. Priority order of guardian: (1) Subject to the other Sections of
     this Chapter, a person in the following priority order shall, ipso
     facto, be a guardian of an incompetent or quasi-competent person:

                 (a)      Husband or wife living in a joint family,

                 (b)      Father or mother,

                 (c)      Son, daughter or widow daughter-in-law living in a
                          joint family,

                 (d)      Separated husband or wife,

                 (e)      Separated son, daughter or widow daughter-in-law,

                 (f)      Grand-father or grand-mother,

                 (g)      Grand-son or grand-daughter,

                 (h)      Elder or younger brother or elder or younger sister,

                 (i)      Grand-father, grand-mother on the mother's parent
                          side, maternal uncle, maternal aunty.

           (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the following person shall be a guardian in the following
     circumstances:




                                          76
             (a)   Where there are more than one person in one
                   priority order eligible to be a guardian, the person
                   mutually agreed upon by them, and in the absence
                   of such agreement, the person as designated by the
                   court,

             (b)   In the case of a person of sound mind and having
                   attained ten years of age, a person chosen by him or
                   her,

                      Provided that in so choosing the guardian, a deed
                   shall be executed to that effect and certified by the
                   court.

             (c)   In the case of a minor of a couple whose
                   matrimonial relationship has been extinguished in
                   accordance with law, the father or mother who
                   maintains him or her,

             (d)   If any person who is in the first priority order
                   declines to be a guardian, becomes of unsound mind
                   or does not act in the capacity of a guardian, the
                   person who is in the next priority order.

                            Provided that if a person in the next order is
                   to so become a guardian, the person shall get it
                   certified by the court that he or she is the guardian.

137. Other person considered to be guardian: Notwithstanding
     anything contained in Section 136, if guardianship to an
     incompetent or quasi-competent person is provided by a person
     other than the one referred to in that Section, the person so


                                   77
     providing guardianship shall be considered to be a guardian of such
     a person.

           Provided that the person who so becomes a guardian shall get
     it certified by the court that he or she is the guardian.

138. Organization considered to be guardian: (1) If a child, who is
     living in an organization, such as a child welfare house, orphanage,
     child home or children's organization, registered pursuant to law
     with the object to have welfare of and protect rights and interests of
     children, has no other guardian, such an organization shall be
     considered to be his or her guardian.

           (2)         In doing any act or taking any action on behalf of a
     minor living in an organization referred to in sub-section (1), the
     chief of such an organization shall do such an act or take such an
     action.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter and Chapter-7
     of Part-3, the term "chief" means the chief executive officer of that
     organization or the chairperson, general manager, managing
     director or other officer acting in that capacity.

139. Guardian may be appointed by court: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained in Section 136 or 137, the court may, in the
     following circumstances, appoint a particular person as the guardian,
     specifying the reason therefor:

                 (a)      If the concerned ward committee of the concerned
                          Local Level files a petition in the court for the
                          appointment of guardian in cases where any person
                          declines to be a guardian pursuant to Section 136,


                                        78
                  (b)      If the stakeholder files a petition in the court for the
                           appointment of guardian.

            (2)         In appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      court shall consider whether or not the rights, interests or protection
      of such incompetent or quasi-competent person may be secured.

            (3)         In appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      court shall also obtain the consent of the person to be appointed as
      the guardian.

            (4)         After appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the court shall give a written notice thereof to the person to be
      guardian and the Local Level.

140. Supervisor may be designated: (1) If a guardian is appointed by the
      court pursuant to Section 139, the court may, if it considers
      necessary to inquire into the acts and actions of such a guardian,
      designate any person as the supervisor.

            (2)         The supervisor designated pursuant to sub-section (1)
      shall make necessary inquiry into the acts and actions of the guardian
      and submit a report thereof to the court.

            (3)         If the guardianship is terminated pursuant to Section
      148, the state of supervision shall also be, ipso facto deemed to be,
      terminated.

141. Disqualifications for guardian: None of the following persons may
      become a guardian:

                  (a)      An incompetent or quasi-competent person,




                                         79
                 (b)     A person proved to have done an act against the
                         rights and interests of an incompetent or quasi-
                         competent person,

                 (c)     A person sentenced by a court to imprisonment for a
                         term of three years or more.

                             Provided that this clause shall not be deemed to
                         prevent a person who is in the priority order under
                         sub-section (1) of Section 136 from being a guardian.

                 (d)     A person deemed disqualified to be a guardian by a
                         count.

142. Maintenance         (palan    poshan)     and       care   of   (herbichar)
     incompetent or quasi-competent person: (1) The guardian shall
     make arrangements for the maintenance, health, education,
     entertainment and care of an incompetent or quasi-competent person
     under his or her guardianship from the property belonging to such a
     person, if any, and if such property is not available, from the
     property belonging to the guardian himself or herself.

           (2)         The   arrangements    for   the    maintenance,    health,
     education, entertainment and care of an incompetent or quasi-
     competent person, pursuant to sub-section (1), shall be made from
     the movable property belonging to such a person, if any, and where
     there is no such movable property or where arrangements for the
     maintenance, health, education, entertainment and care cannot be
     made from that property, his or her immovable property may be sold
     for that purpose with the prior permission of the court.




                                       80
           Provided that it is not required to obtain permission of the
     court to sell the immovable property where a person in the priority
     order under sub-section (1) of Section 136 is the guardian.
143. Property to be supervised, protected and managed properly: (1)
     The guardian shall supervise and protect the property belonging to
     the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his or her
     guardianship.
           (2)    The guardian may carry on any business or transaction
     by investing the property belonging to the person under his or her
     guardianship.
144. To maintain books and accounts accurately: (1) The guardian
     shall maintain accurately the books and accounts of expenditures
     incurred in the maintenance(palan poshan), health, education and
     care of (herbichar) the incompetent or quasi-competent person
     under his or her guardianship, and of the incomes and expenditures
     made in the course of the management of the property belonging to
     that person and the inventory proving the ownership of such property.
           Provided that it is not required to maintain such books and
     accounts where a person in the priority order referred to in sub-
     section (1) of Section 136 is a guardian.
           (2)    The guardian shall submit the books and accounts
     maintained pursuant to sub-section (1) and the inventory proving the
     ownership of that property to the incompetent or quasi-competent
     person within one year after the date on which that person has
     attained majority pursuant to law or the date on which that person
     has notified in writing the court that he or she is competent to carry
     out business.



                                    81
           (3)     If an incompetent or quasi-competent person dies when
     he or she was under guardianship, the guardian shall submit the
     books and accounts and the inventory proving ownership of that
     property referred to in sub-section (1) to that person’s nearest
     successor within six months after the date of his or her death.

145. Power to institute legal action or defend case: The guardian may,
     for the protection of the rights, interests of an incompetent or quasi-
     competent person under his or her guardianship, institute a legal
     action against such a person or defend a case filed against him or her.

           Provided that the guardian is not allowed to so renounce a
     claim or plea in relation to a case instituted upon the incompetent or
     quasi-competent person being its plaintiff or defendant or execute a
     deed of compromise in any case as to cause an adverse effect to him
     or her.

146. Power to act on behalf of incompetent or quasi-competent
     person: Subject to the provisions contained elsewhere in this
     Chapter, the guardian may carry out such act on behalf of the
     incompetent or quasi-competent person as may be carried out by that
     person according to law.

147. Act may be carried out only in consonance with terms:
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a
     person is designated as the guardian for an incompetent or quasi-
     competent person with specification of certain terms, such a guardian
     shall have the authority to carry out acts only in consonance with
     such terms.




                                    82
148. Termination of guardianship: (1) A guardianship shall be deemed
      to be terminated in any of the following circumstances:

                  (a)      If a petition filed by the guardian stating that he or
                           she is unable to be a guardian is accepted by the
                           court,

                  (b)      If the guardian or the incompetent or quasi-
                           competent person under guardianship dies,

                  (c)      If the incompetent or quasi-competent person
                           becomes a competent,

                  (d)      If, at the request of the incompetent or quasi-
                           competent person under guardianship, the court
                           removes the guardian.

            (2)         If a guardianship is terminated pursuant to sub-section
      (1) and the person who was the guardian and the person who was
      under guardianship are surviving, the person who had worked as
      guardian shall continue to maintain (palan poshan) and take care
      of(herbichar) the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his
      or her guardianship until another guardian is appointed.

            (3)         If a guardianship is terminated pursuant to sub-section
      (1), the statute of limitation, time-limit or appointed date for
      appearance in relation to any legal proceedings required to be carried
      out by the guardian pursuant to this Chapter shall not be deemed to
      have been expired, from the date on which the guardianship is so
      terminated until another guardian is appointed.

149. Guardianship not to be transferred to successor: If a guardianship
      is terminated upon the death of the guardian pursuant to Section 148,


                                         83
     the right, authority and responsibility vested in him or her in the
     capacity of a guardian shall not be transferred to his or her successor.

           Provided that in cases where another guardian is required to be
     appointed for an incompetent or quasi-competent person, he or she
     shall, in the capacity of the successor to the guardian,
     maintain(palanposhan)        and take care of (herbichar) such
     incompetent or quasi-competent person until another guardian is
     appointed.

150. Power to recover expenses: If any guardian has arranged the
     maintenance, health, education, sports, entertainment and care
     of(herbichar) the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his
     or her guardianship from his or her own property, the guardian may
     recover the amount of expenses so incurred from the property
     belonging to the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his or
     her guardianship.

           Provided that such expense cannot be so recovered where a
     person in the priority order referred to in sub-section (1) of Section
     136 is the guardian.

151. Amount of loss and damage may be recovered: If the guardian
     knowingly, deceitfully, fraudulently or dishonestly causes loss and
     damage to the property belonging to the incompetent or quasi-
     competent person under his or her guardianship in such manner as to
     or not to benefit himself or herself, the incompetent or quasi-
     competent person aggrieved therefrom may recover the amount of
     loss and damage caused to him or her from such a guardian.




                                    84
152. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
     action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
     months after the date of knowledge of such act or action.




                                   85
                               Chapter-7

                 Provisions Relating to Curatorship

153. To be curator of minor: (1) If any minor does not have any
     guardian as referred to in Chapter-6 of this Part, any person may act
     in the capacity of curator of such a minor for the maintenance,
     health, education, care of, and protection of property belonging to,
     him or her, until the minor attains eighteen years of age.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     a person may appoint any one as a curator for the maintenance,
     health, education and care of his or her minor.

154. Curator of person of unsound mind: (1) If a person of unsound
     mind does not have any guardian as referred to in Chapter-6 of this
     Part, any other person may act in the capacity of curator for the
     maintenance, care of, and protection of property belonging to, him
     or her.

           (2)    If there is no curator or the curator cannot be
     ascertained under sub-section (1), the person under whose custody,
     supervision or oversight the person of unsound mind is living for
     the time being shall be the curator of such a person.

155. Mother to become curator of minor: Notwithstanding anything
     contained in Section 153, if the father of any minor below ten years
     of age has died or disappeared or become of unsound mind or is in
     abroad and the mother of such a minor is alive, she herself shall be
     the curator of that minor even though she has concluded another
     marriage.




                                   86
156. Body corporate to become curator: (1) If any person who has no
     guardian under Chapter-6 of this Part is under the supervision,
     protection or custody of a body corporate, such a body corporate
     shall be the curator of such a person.

           (2)    If a body corporate referred to in sub-section (1)
     becomes a curator, the chief of such a body corporate shall exercise
     the authority of a curator.

157. Court may appoint curator: (1) If any person has no guardian
     under Chapter-6 of this Part or no one acts as his or her curator, the
     concerned ward committee of the Local Level may file a petition,
     stating the details thereof, in the court for the appointment of a
     curator.

           (2)    In filing a petition pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     concerned ward committee of the Local Level shall set out the
     names, surnames, addresses and professions of the potential persons
     who could be appointed as the curator and also submit, along with
     the petition, a deed of consent given by such potential persons to act
     as the curator.

           (3)    If a petition is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     court shall make an order to appoint any one appropriate person,
     out of the persons whose names are submitted pursuant to sub-
     section (2), as the curator.

158. Qualifications of curator: Any person other than a person who is
     disqualified for being a guardian pursuant to Section 141 may
     become a curator.




                                    87
159. Curator to take custody of property: (1) The curator shall take
     custody of, manage and operate, the property belonging to the
     person under his or her curatorship.

           (2)      The curator shall arrange for the maintenance,
     education and medical treatment of the person under his or her
     curatorship, to the extent possible in view of his or her capacity,
     from the property taken into custody by him or her.

160. Power to use property: A person who becomes a curator may
     spend all the returns obtained from the property under his or her
     custody for the maintenance, health of the person under his or her
     curatorship and for the education of such a person, if he or she is a
     minor.

161. Power to spend immovable property with court's permission:
     (1) If the movable property belonging to the person under his or her
     curatorship is insufficient to meet the expenses required for the
     maintenance, education or medical treatment of that person, the
     curator may file a petition, setting out the matter, in the court for
     permission to sell the immovable property or any part thereof for
     that purpose.

           (2)      If, upon inquiring into a petition filed pursuant to sub-
     section (1), it considers the reason for selling such immovable
     property to be reasonable, the court may grant permission to so sell
     the immovable property or any part thereof as it considers
     appropriate.

162. Property to be taken care of and protected rationally and
     carefully: (1) A curator shall look after of and protect the property



                                     88
     belonging to a person under his or her curatorship rationally and
     carefully.

           (2)          The concerned curator shall be liable for any kind of
     loss or damage to the property belonging to the person under his or
     her curatorship because of his or her failure to so look after and
     protect the property pursuant to sub-section (1).

           Provided that the curator shall not be liable for any loss or
     damage to such property due to a disaster.

           (3)          If a complaint is filed with allegation that the curator
     has failed to look after of and protect the property pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the court may remove the concerned person from
     curatorship.

163. Transfer of title, ipso facto to be void: If a curator sells any
     immovable property belonging to the person under his or her
     curatorship to himself or herself or to any of his or her family
     members, with ulterior motive to disentitling such a person to that
     property or the title thereto happens to be transferred to him or her
     in any manner, such transfer of title shall, ipso facto, be void.

164. Curatorship to be terminated ipso facto: (1) Curatorship shall be
     deemed to have been terminated ipso facto in any of the following
     circumstances:

                  (a)      In the case of a minor, if he or she attains eighteen
                           years of age,

                  (b)      In the case of a person of unsound mind, if he or
                           she becomes of sound mind,




                                           89
                 (c)      If custody of the minor is taken by the mother or
                          father or both,

                 (d)      If the guardian of a minor or person of unsound
                          mind is appointed,

                 (e)      If the court removes a person from curatorship
                          pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 162,

                 (f)      If the curator has no qualification referred to in
                          Section 158,

                 (g)      If the curator or the person under curatorship dies.

           (2)         If curatorship is terminated pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the curator shall immediately return to the concerned person the
     property taken into custody in the capacity of curator.

165. Custody of property may be handed over: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a person is unable
     to protect and manage the property under his or her title, ownership
     or possession on his or her own, for the reason that he or she has to
     go elsewhere by leaving the place where he or she resides, he or she
     may appoint any person as a curator to that end and hand over the
     custody of such property to that other person.

           (2)         If the custody of property is handed over to any person
     pursuant to sub-section (1), the person taking the custody of such
     property shall protect and manage the property and return the
     property to the person handing over its custody as and when the
     handing over person so requires.




                                         90
166. Requirement to certification by court: One who becomes a
     curator pursuant to Sections 153, 154 and 165 shall get that matter
     certified by the court.

167. Application of other provisions: The provisions contained in
     Sections 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150 and 151 shall also apply
     mutatis mutandis to the curator and the person under curatorship.

168. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
     action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
     months after the date of knowledge of such an act or action.




                                   91
                                Chapter-8

                     Provisions Relating to Adoption

169. To be deemed adopted son or adopted daughter: If a person
     accepts a son or daughter of another person as his or her son or
     daughter, such a son or a daughter shall be deemed to be an adopted
     son or daughter.

170. Adoption to be effected in a manner to protect the best interests
     of child: In effecting adoption pursuant to this Act, adoption shall
     be effected in a manner to protect the best rights and interests of the
     child.

171. Prohibition on adoption by person having child: (1) No person
     having his or her own son shall adopt a son and no person having
     his or her own daughter shall adopt a daughter pursuant to this
     Chapter.

              (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a son or daughter does not live with a man or woman who is
     living separately by the reason of judicial separation, such a man or
     a woman may adopt a son or a daughter.

              Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter and Chapter-9
     of this Part, the term "judicial separation" means a circumstance
     where a person obtains partition in property according to the order
     of the court or lives separately according to law or lives separately
     after separation of bread and board from other coparceners.

              (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
     or (2), if a person who has a biological son or daughter makes a
     petition in the concerned court for the adoption of another child,


                                    92
     disclosing therein his or her financial capacity to make
     arrangements for the maintenance, health care, education and care
     of the child, and if, upon inquiring into such a petition, it appears
     that the petitioner has such status, the court may grant permission to
     him or her to adopt such child.

172. Adoption may be effected: (1) The following person may effect
     adoption of a child:

                 (a)      A couple to whom no child has born even up to ten
                          years of the marriage,

                 (b)      An unmarried woman having completed forty-five
                          years of age, a widow, divorcee woman or
                          judicially separated woman, having no son or
                          daughter,

                 (c)      An unmarried man having completed forty-five
                          years of age, a widower, divorcee or judicially
                          separated man, having no son or daughter.

           (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the following person cannot effect adoption:

           (a)         One who is of unsound mind,

           (b)         One who is convicted by the court of a criminal
                       offense involving moral turpitude,

           (c)         One who does not have financial capacity to afford
                       maintenance, health care, education, sports facility,
                       entertainment and care of the minor.




                                        93
           (3)   In effecting adoption by the husband or wife living in a
     joint family pursuant to this Section, they shall obtain each other's
     consent.

173. Adoption not to be effected: (1) No one shall effect adoption of
     any of the following persons:

           (a)   One who has completed fourteen years of age,

           (b)   One who is the only son or daughter,

                        Provided that this provision shall not apply to the
                 circumstance referred to in sub-section (3) of Section
                 175.

           (c)   One who has been once adopted as a son or daughter,

                        Provided that this provision shall not apply
                 where the adoption is annulled according to law.

           (d)   One who is in higher degree of relationship than the
                 person adopting the son or daughter,

           (e)   One who is not a citizen of Nepal.

                        Provided that the provision of this clause shall
                 not apply to a non-resident Nepali citizen who has
                 obtained a foreign citizenship.

           (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of
     sub-section (1), if the person to be adopted is a person within the
     relation of three generations or a son or daughter born to the ex-
     husband of the wife, that person may be adopted even though he or
     she has completed fourteen years of age.




                                     94
174. Difference of age between adopter and adoptee: (1) The age
     difference between the adopter and the adoptee shall be at least
     twenty-five years.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     no age restriction shall apply to the adoption of a person within the
     relation of three generations.

175. Consent to be obtained for adoption: (1) In effecting adoption of
     a child, the adopter shall obtain written consent of both father and
     mother of such a child, if both of them are surviving, and of the
     surviving father or mother, as the case may be, if either of them is
     surviving.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if the father and mother are separated because of the dissolution of
     matrimonial relationship between the husband and wife or judicial
     separation, and a child living with such a father or mother
     according to the agreement made at the time of such dissolution or
     judicial separation is intended to be adopted, the adopter shall
     obtain consent of the person with whom, out of the father and the
     mother, the child has been living.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     adoption of a child whose father and mother are not traced or
     surviving or a child whose father and mother are surviving but who
     has been maintained or cared by a person or organization following
     the conclusion of another marriage either by his or her father or
     mother may be effected by obtaining written consent of the person
     or organization so maintaining or caring the child.



                                      95
           (4)    While adopting a child above ten years of age pursuant
     to sub-section (1), (2) or (3), written consent of such a child shall
     also be obtained.

           (5)    Written consent referred to in sub-section (4) shall be
     executed by the concerned child in the presence of his or her father,
     mother or guardian or curator exercising the maternal and parental
     authority.

           (6)    Before obtaining consent pursuant to this Section,
     information shall be given to the person putting a child up for
     adoption, guardian or curator and the child about, inter alia, the
     meaning, legal status and consequences of adoption.

           (7)    No financial inducement of any type shall be made in
     obtaining consent pursuant to this Section and such consent requires
     to be given voluntarily.

176. Adoption deemed to have been effected by couple themselves: If
     adoption was effected by the husband or wife living under judicial
     separation and, subsequent thereto, the husband and wife have lived
     jointly, the adoption effected before living so jointly shall be
     deemed to have been effected by the couple.

177. Procedures for effecting adoption: (1) If a person is desirous of
     adopting a child, he or she shall make a petition to the concerned
     court, along with a duly executed deed of adoption, in fulfillment of
     the legal requirements.

           (2)    If, upon inquiring into the deed of adoption received
     pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned district court finds that
     permission may be given to the petitioner for adoption, it shall issue


                                   96
     an order granting permission for adoption and shall authenticate
     such deed.

           (3)         If, upon making inquiry pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     court finds that permission cannot be given to the petitioner for
     adoption, it shall issue an order accordingly and give information
     thereof to the petitioner.

178. Entitlements and rights of adopted son or daughter: (1) The
     entitlements, rights, obligations and responsibilities of an adopted
     son or daughter shall be the same as that of a biological son or
     daughter of the adoptive person.

           (2)         Even if a son or daughter is born to a person who has
     already adopted a person, the equal status of such adopted son or
     adopted daughter to that of biological son or daughter shall not be
     prejudiced thereby.

179. Surname of adopted son or daughter: An adopted son or
     daughter may use the surname of either or both of the adoptive
     father and mother.

           Provided that-

                 (1)      If an adopted son or daughter so desires, he or she
                          may use also the surname of his or her biological
                          father or mother.

                 (2)      If the adoption is annulled, his or her surname shall
                          be that of his or her biological father or mother.

180. Not allowed to claim partition share of father and mother: An
     adopted son or daughter shall not be entitled to claim partition share
     in the property belonging to his or her biological father and mother.

                                         97
           Provided that-

           (1)         If the adoption is annulled, he or she may claim
                       partition share in the property belonging to his or her
                       biological father and mother,

           (2)         If an adopted son or daughter has already obtained his
                       or her partition share at the time of effecting adoption,
                       he or she may receive such property as well.

181. Adoptive person's obligations: (1) The obligations of an adoptive
     person shall be as follows:

                 (a)      To make arrangements for the maintenance, health
                          care, sports, entertainment and proper education of
                          the adopted son or daughter according to his or her
                          reputation and capacity as if he or she were his or
                          her biological son or daughter,

                 (b)      To protect the rights and interests of the adopted
                          son or daughter,

                 (c)      To exercise the authority as referred to in Chapter-5
                          of this Part.

           (2)         If the adoptive person does not fulfill the obligations
     under sub-section (1), the adopted son or daughter may live
     separately by obtaining his or her partition share.

182. Obligations of adopted son or daughter: The obligations of the
     adopted son or daughter shall be as follows:

                 (a)      To make arrangements for the maintenance, health
                          care and care of the adoptive person according to



                                          98
                           his or her reputation and capacity as if such person
                           were his or her natural father or mother,

                  (b)      To protect, look after and properly manage the
                           property of the adoptive person,

                  (c)      To protect the rights and interests of the adoptive
                           person.

183. Facility of visit and making correspondences to be provided:
      The adoptive person shall provide facility to the adopted son or
      daughter to make visits to, and correspondence with, his or her
      biological father and mother, from time to time.

184. Adoption to be void: If a person effects adoption in contravention
      of Section 171, sub-section (1) of, and clauses (a) and (b) of sub-
      section (2) of Section 172, Sections 173, 174 and 175, such
      adoption shall ipso facto be void.

185. Voidable adoption: (1) If an adoptive person fails to fulfill the
      obligations referred to in Section 181, any adopted son or daughter
      may have the adoption annulled.

            Provided that if such adopted son or daughter has already
      received a partition share, he or she shall not be entitled to have the
      adoption annulled.

            (2)         An adoptive person may have the adoption annulled in
      any of the following circumstances:

                  (a)      If the adopted son or daughter fails to fulfill the
                           obligations referred to in Section 182,




                                         99
                 (b)      If the adopted son or daughter expels him or her
                          from home or subjects him or her to physical or
                          mental torture, from time to time,

                 (c)      If the adopted son or daughter misuses his or her
                          property,

                 (d)      If the adopted son or daughter leaves him or her and
                          lives separately without his or her consent for three
                          years or more.

           (3)         The provisions of clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (2)
     shall not apply to the married adopted daughter.

186. Termination of adoption: (1) If adoption is annulled pursuant to
     Section 184 or 185, the relationship between the adoptive person
     and the adopted son or daughter shall be deemed to have been
     terminated.

           (2)         If the relationship between the adoptive person and the
     adopted son or daughter is terminated pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the entitlements, rights and obligations vested in him or her in the
     capacity of adopted son or daughter shall also be terminated.

           Provided that no facilities already enjoyed, rights acquired or
     exercised and obligations fulfilled in the capacity of adopted son or
     daughter during the validity period of adoption shall be prejudiced.

187. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
     action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within one year
     after the date on which such an act was done or an action was taken.




                                       100
                               Chapter-9

           Provisions Relating to Inter-Country Adoption

188. Inter-country adoption deemed to be accepted: If any foreigner
     accepts a minor of a Nepali citizen or of a foreigner domiciled in
     Nepal as an adopted son or daughter, it shall be deemed to be
     accepted as an inter-country adoption.

189. Adoption not to be effected without obtaining permission: (1)
     No foreigner shall be allowed to hold any minor of a Nepali citizen
     or of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal as an adopted son or daughter,
     without obtaining permission from the Government of Nepal.

           (2)    Permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be
     granted only to the citizens or married couple of those countries
     which are opened by the Government of Nepal, by a notification in
     the Nepal Gazette, for inter-country adoption in Nepal.

190. Best interests of minor to be ensured in granting permission for
     adoption: (1) Prior to granting permission to a foreigner for
     adoption, the Government of Nepal shall consider whether or not
     the best interests of the child will be ensured, his or her human
     rights will be protected and such a child will be abducted, sold,
     trafficked or otherwise abused.

           (2)    Permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be
     granted only if, upon considering the matters pursuant to sub-
     section (1), it appears appropriate to grant permission to a foreigner
     to adopt a child.




                                   101
191. Child eligible to be given for adoption: Any of the following
     children having stayed in a children home for at least six months
     may be given to a foreigner for adoption:

                 (a)      Orphan children who, upon death of both father and
                          mother, are not under protection of any one,

                 (b)      Voluntarily abandoned children.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-

           (1)         "Children home" means a child welfare home and
                       orphanage established in accordance with law, with the
                       objective of protecting the rights and interests of
                       children, and this term includes a children home or
                       Balmandir established by the Government of Nepal.

           (2)         "Orphan child" means any of the following child
                       certified as an orphan by the District Administration
                       Office:

                             (a)   A child found unclaimed by the police,
                                   and whose father or mother is not found,

                             (b)   A child left unclaimed in a hospital or
                                   health institution,

                             (c)   A child whose father and mother are not
                                   traced out,

                             (d)   A child whose father and mother are both
                                   dead and who has no property for
                                   maintenance.




                                       102
           (3)   "Voluntarily abandoned children" means the following
                 children who have been surrendered to the custody of a
                 children home, through the District Administration
                 Office, by the following person, upon being unable to
                 make     arrangements      for   their   maintenance   and
                 education, by executing a deed relating thereto:

                       (a) In the case of a child whose father is dead or
                            disappeared and mother has concluded
                            another marriage, such a mother,

                       (b) If more than one child have born, and the
                            mother is not financially able to afford their
                            maintenance or education because the father
                            is dead, disappeared or of unsound mind, in
                            the case of such children, their mother,

                       (c) If more than one child have born, and the
                            father is not financially able to afford their
                            maintenance or education because the mother
                            is dead, disappeared or of unsound mind, in
                            the case of such children, their father,

                       (d) In the case of an orphan child who has no
                            property, his or her guardian or curator.

192. Foreigner eligible for adopting son or daughter: (1) Permission
     may be granted to the following foreigner for the adoption of any
     child of a Nepali citizen or of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal:

           (a)   A couple from whom no child is born even up to ten
                 years of their marriage,


                                   103
           (b)    An unmarried woman a widow, divorcee woman or a
                  judicially separated woman who has completed forty-
                  five but not fifty-five years of age, having no son or
                  daughter,

           (c)    An unmarried man a widower, divorcee or a judicially
                  separated man who has completed forty-five but not
                  fifty-five years of age, having no son or daughter.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     no permission may be granted to the following foreigner for
     adoption:

           (a)    One who is of unsound mind,

           (b)    One who is convicted of a criminal offense involving
                  moral turpitude, by a court of Nepal or the concerned
                  country.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     where the law of a foreign country provides that a citizen of that
     country may adopt more than one child, he or she may adopt a child
     despite that he or she has a child.

           (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, a person of the country that prohibits a Nepali citizen from
     adopting a child or provides discrimination between the rights of an
     adopted son or a daughter and the rights of naturally born son or
     daughter shall not be permitted to adopt a child from Nepal.

193. Provision relating to Inter-country Adoption Board: (1) The
     Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette,
     form an Inter-country Adoption Board so as to act as the central


                                    104
agency for the purpose of making recommendation for granting
permission to a foreigner for adoption of a child pursuant to this
Chapter or designate any government body to perform such
function.

      Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"Board" means the Inter-country Adoption Board, and this term
includes the government body designated to perform such function.

      (2)    The Board referred to in sub-section (1) shall be so
formed as to include one child right worker who has worked in the
field of the rights of the child for at least fifteen years.

      (3)    Other functions, powers and duties of the Board, in
addition to those mentioned elsewhere in this Chapter, shall be as
follows:

            (a)    To frame policies on inter-country adoption and
                   recommend the same to the Government of Nepal,

            (b)    To make coordination between the various
                   agencies on matters of inter-country adoption,

            (c)    To prevent undue financial and other advantage
                   likely to be exchanged while giving or taking
                   adoption,

            (d)    To make available any information required by the
                   central adoption agencies or other relevant public
                   agencies of other countries about the condition of
                   adopted sons or daughters,

            (e)    To prevent child abuse, exploitation, trafficking or
                   kidnapping likely to happen in effecting adoption

                                105
                       and to protect Nepali children from any other
                       practice likely to harm them,

                 (f)   To make recommendation to the Government of
                       Nepal to fix the charges applicable for adoption,

                 (g)   To specify the form of application to be filed for
                       adoption,

                 (h)   To    make         arrangements   for    maintaining
                       confidentiality of records of the minors desirous to
                       be adopted, their biological father and mother or
                       adoptive father and mother,

                 (i)   To carry out such other functions relating to inter-
                       country adoption as may be required.

           (4)     Other matters including the procedures relating to the
     meeting of the Board shall be as determined by the Board itself.

194. Application to be filed for adoption: (1) A foreigner or couple
     qualified under Section 192 and desirous of adopting a Nepali
     minor or a minor of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal shall make an
     application to the Board, accompanied by the following documents,
     through the embassy of his or her country in Nepal and where no
     such an embassy is situated in Nepal, the embassy designated for
     Nepal or the central agency of the concerned country which gives
     permission for adoption:

                 (a)   The applicant's birth registration certificate,

                 (b)   The applicant's recently taken photograph,

                 (c)   A photocopy of the applicant's passport,



                                    106
(d)   A document certifying the applicant’s marital
      status,

(e)   A certificate issued by a licensed medical doctor
      on the applicant’s health,

(f)   A certificate issued by the governmental body of
      the   concerned   country,    indicating   that   the
      applicant is of good character and has not been
      convicted by a court of a criminal charge
      involving moral turpitude,

(g)   A document that certifies the applicant's property
      and income source,

(h)   The applicant's social, psychological and home
      study report,

(i)   Age, sex and other details of the child sought for
      adoption,

(j)   A letter of consent issued by the government of
      the applicant’s country for making adoption in
      Nepal,

(k)   A letter of guarantee issued by the government of
      the concerned country or by the embassy of that
      country based in Nepal or designated for Nepal
      indicating that according to the law of the
      applicant’s home country, the status of the person
      to be adopted is equal to that of the applicant’s
      biological son or daughter,




                  107
                 (l)   A letter of guarantee issued by the government of
                       the applicant's home country, embassy of that
                       country based in Nepal or designated for Nepal
                       indicating that, according to the law of the
                       applicant’s    home   country,   the   applicant   is
                       qualified to make adoption and has the financial
                       capacity to bear all responsibilities including
                       maintenance, health care, education and protection
                       of the minor to be adopted.

           (2)    The documents referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
     written in the English language or translated into the English or
     Nepali language by a competent body.

           (3)    If it is found, from an inquiry into the application
     received pursuant to sub-section (1), that it is appropriate to grant
     permission for adoption according to the applicant’s request, the
     Board shall, by keeping confident the applicant’s name and address,
     forward the details relating thereto to the selection committee.

           (4)    The application to be made pursuant to sub-section (1)
     shall be accompanied by the application fee as determined by the
     Government of Nepal, on the recommendation of the Board.

195. Provisions relating to selection committee: The Government of
     Nepal shall form a selection committee, by a notification in the
     Nepal Gazette, for the purpose of making recommendations to the
     Board as to which of minors may be appropriate for adoption by
     any foreigner or foreign couple, after selecting the person or couple
     desirous of making adoption, and the minor.



                                     108
196. To make recommendation by selecting person effecting
      adoption and child: The Board shall, based on the minor’s details
      according to the applicant’s details and relevant matters received
      pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 194, and also having regard
      to the applicant’s request, ascertain what type of minor is
      appropriate for being adopted by which applicant and recommend
      the name of the applicant and the minor to the Board.

197. Permission to be granted for adoption: (1) If the Board considers,
      from an inquiry into the recommendation received from the
      selection committee pursuant to Section 196, that it is appropriate to
      grant a minor as recommended for adoption by a foreigner, it shall
      make according recommendation to the Government of Nepal.

            (2)    If, upon an inquiry into the recommendation made by
      the Board pursuant to sub-section (1), it thinks reasonable to do so,
      the Government of Nepal shall, according to the recommendation of
      the Board, grant permission for the adoption of such a minor by the
      foreigner.

            (3)    After permission has been granted pursuant to sub-
      section (2), the Government of Nepal shall issue a certificate
      relating thereto for that purpose.

            (4)    After the certificate has been issued pursuant to sub-
      section (3), inter-country adoption shall be deemed to have duly
      been effected from Nepal.

            (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
      if, prior to granting permission for the adoption of any minor by a
      foreigner, the father, mother or other guardian of the minor desires



                                    109
     to take his or her minor back, such a minor may not be granted for
     adoption.

           (6)    If the Government of Nepal grants permission for the
     adoption of any minor by a foreigner pursuant to sub-section (2),
     the applicant shall appear in person and take over the concerned
     minor.

           Provided that if the applicant is a couple and either of them is
     unable to appear in person, the other spouse may take over such a
     minor on the basis of the certified deed of consent executed by the
     absent spouse.

           (7)    After permission has been granted for the adoption of
     any minor by a foreigner pursuant to this Section, the Government
     of Nepal shall give information thereof to the central agency
     responsible for inter-country adoption situated in the country of the
     adoptive person and also to the embassy of the concerned country
     designated for Nepal, if any.

           (8)    A foreigner or couple making application for adoption
     may, if not satisfied with any decision made by the Government of
     Nepal, make an appeal to the concerned High Court.

198. Special provision relating to selection of families for minors in
     need of special care: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
     elsewhere in this Chapter, the Board may accord priority to those
     applicants who have applied for the adoption of minors in need of
     special care and select families to that effect.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
     “minors in need of special care” means those minors, out of orphan


                                     110
     minors or voluntarily abandoned minors, who are in need of special
     care due to physical or mental condition, unusual or abnormal
     growth or more age.

           (2)    The Board shall determine as to whether any minor is a
     minor in need of special care or not.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if, in selecting the families and the minors in need of special care
     pursuant to that sub-section, any detail relating to the age, sex and
     health of the minor as demanded by a family in the first order of
     priority does not match, those minors in need of special care who
     match to the details as demanded by such family may be selected
     respectively.

           (4)    The other procedures on the selection of families for
     minors in need of special care and classification of such minors
     shall be as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.

199. Special provision relating to permission to be granted for
     adoption: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Chapter, if any renowned foreign citizen desires to adopt any minor
     as referred to in Section 191, he or she may make an application to
     the Board, along with a formal recommendation by the head of state,
     head of government or foreign minister of the concerned country.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
     “renowned foreign citizen” means any of the following persons:

                 (a)   Head of state or head of government of a foreign
                       country,




                                   111
                 (b)   Chief    of   an    international   intergovernmental
                       organization,
                 (c)   A laureate of the noble prize,
                 (d)   A person or entrepreneur who has an income of
                       more than three hundred thousand US Dollars a
                       year.
           (2)     If the Board considers, from an inquiry into an
     application received pursuant to sub-section (1), that it is reasonable
     to grant a minor as demanded by such a foreign citizen for adoption,
     it shall make recommendation to the Government of Nepal, Council
     of Ministers, accordingly.
           (3)    If a recommendation is made pursuant to sub-section
     (2), the Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers may give
     permission to such a foreign citizen to adopt the minor demanded
     by him or her.
           (4)    Any foreign citizen making adoption pursuant to this
     Section shall, upon making such adoption, comply with the other
     provisions set forth in this Chapter.
200. Details to be forwarded: A foreigner who makes adoption
     pursuant to this Chapter shall each year forward details relating to
     the    arrangements       he    or      she   has     made    for   the
     maintenance(palanposhan), education, health and care of(herchaha)
     the adopted minor until such minor attains the age of majority
     according to the law of the concerned country, in each six months
     for a period of two years and thereafter in each year to the
     Government of Nepal through the Nepali Embassy or Consulate
     based in his or her country or Nepali mission abroad, and if such



                                     112
     mission is not situated there, through the Embassy of Nepal related
     to such a country.

201. To monitor: (1) The Board may itself monitor as to whether a
     foreigner who has adopted a Nepali minor has made arrangements
     for the maintenance (Palanposhan), health, education and care of
     (Herchaha) such minor until the minor attains the age of majority,
     or for that purpose, form, as per necessity, a sub-committee
     consisting also of a representative of the Nepali Embassy or
     Consulate based in the concerned country.

           (2)    The Board or sub-committee referred to in sub-section
     (1) may, for that purpose, carry out monitoring by visiting the place
     where the child is residing.

           (3)    The Board or sub-committee shall submit a report of
     monitoring conducted by it under sub-section (2) to the
     Government of Nepal.

           (4)    The report referred to in sub-section (3) shall contain,
     inter alia, a statement whether the best interests of the adopted
     Nepali minor have been served when he or she is residing with the
     adoptive person or not.

           (5)    If the report received pursuant to sub-section (3)
     contains a statement that the best interests of the adopted Nepali
     minor have not been served when he or she is residing with the
     adoptive person, the Government of Nepal shall, also taking
     opinion of the concerned minor if her or she is able to express his or
     her opinion or is above ten years of age, bring that matter to the




                                    113
      attention of the Government of the concerned country through the
      diplomatic channel.

            (6)   If the condition of the adopted Nepali minor is not
      improved even after the attention drawn pursuant to sub-section (5),
      the Government of Nepal shall, by a notification in the Nepal
      Gazette, remove such a country from the list of countries opened
      for their citizens to make inter-country adoption from Nepal.
202. Case may be filed: A case may be filed in the court of the
      concerned country for the annulment of adoption, by a minor
      adopted as an adopted son or daughter within one year after the date
      on which the minor attained majority, on the grounds of failure to
      make arrangements for proper maintenance(Palanposhan), health,
      education and care of (Herchaha) him or her, and by the Nepali
      Embassy or Consulate based in the country where the adopted son
      or daughter is residing within one year after the date on which the
      adoptive person failed to make such arrangements.
203. Provisions of the Act to be applicable: (1) Provisions      contained
      in Sections 173, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 181 and 183 in relation to
      adopted sons or daughters shall also apply to the sons or daughters
      adopted by foreigners pursuant to this Chapter.
            (2)   Provision of Section 191 shall not apply for the
      adoption of the minors of foreigners domiciled in Nepal.
            (3)   The       Government    of   Nepal      may,   on    the
      recommendation of the Board, make necessary Guidelines for the
      implementation of the provisions contained in this Chapter.
204. Statute of limitation: If a separate statute of limitation for making
      a lawsuit is specified in this Chapter, the lawsuit may be made



                                   114
accordingly, and if such statute of limitation is not specified, a
person aggrieved from any act committed or action taken under this
Chapter may make a lawsuit within one year after the date on which
such an act was done or action was taken.




                            115
                                 Chapter-10

                   Provisions Relating to Partition

205. To be deemed coparcener: For the purposes of apportionment of a
     property in common, the husband, wife, father, mother, son and
     daughter shall be deemed to be coparceners, subject to the other
     Sections of this Chapter.

206. Equal entitlement to partition share: (1) Each coparcener shall
     have equal entitlement to partition share.

           (2)    If a woman coparcener is pregnant at the time of
     partition, and the baby to be delivered by her is to become a
     coparcener, partition shall be made by treating also such would be
     born baby as a coparcener and only after setting aside his or her
     partition share of property.

           (3)    If the pregnant woman under sub-section (2) does not
     deliver a live baby, the partition share set aside for such a baby
     shall be divided equally between the other coparceners.

207. Son and daughter born from couple whose matrimonial
     relationship is dissolved to obtain partition share: A son and
     daughter born to a couple who cannot conclude a marriage or
     whose marriage cannot be considered valid or whose matrimonial
     relationship is dissolved according to law shall obtain their partition
     share from such a father and mother.

208. To obtain partition share from mother: (1) A son and daughter
     whose father is not traced out shall obtain their partition share from
     the property belonging to their mother only.



                                    116
           (2)    A wife kept without making public or a son and
     daughter born from her shall not be entitled to claim a partition
     share after the death of the husband or father.

209. To obtain partition share from part of father or husband: (1) A
     son and daughter child or wives of brothers living in an undivided
     family shall obtain partition share only from the part of their
     respective father or husband, as the case may be.

           (2)    If the husband, father or mother dies before effecting
     partition, his wife or his or her child shall obtain the partition share
     to which the husband, father or mother is entitled.

           (3)    If a person has more than one wife, they shall obtain
     their respective partition share only from the part of the husband.

210. Latter wife or child to obtain partition share from part of
     husband or father: (1) If a person concludes another marriage or a
     child is born from the wife so married, after effecting partition
     between his wife, son, daughter or while he is living together with
     such a wife, son, daughter after mixing his partition share with that
     of them, such a wife, son or daughter shall obtain her or his
     partition share only from the part of the property of the husband or
     father, as the case may be.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Chapter, if a person whose wife is surviving concludes another
     marriage before effecting partition, the partition shares of the other
     coparcener shall first be set aside and the woman who is so married
     shall be provided with a partition share from the part to which he is
     entitled.



                                    117
211. Right to obtain partition share: (1) A     husband,   wife,   father,
     mother, son and daughter having property in common shall make,
     according to their reputation and income, arrangements for the
     maintenance and medical treatment of the wife, husband, son,
     daughter, father and mother, as the case may be.

           (2)    If a person who is bound to make arrangements as
     referred to in sub-section (1) fails to make such arrangements, the
     coparcener is entitled to get separated by obtaining his or her
     partition share.

212. Separation may be effected at anytime: (1) If there is a mutual
     agreement between the coparcener, they may get separated at any
     time by obtaining their respective partition share.

           (2)    If the husband, father, mother or person acting as the
     head of family considers it appropriate for the coparcener to obtain
     their respective partition share and get separated rather than living
     in a single family, the coparcener may get separated by effecting
     partition at any time.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, the term “person
     acting as the head of family” means a person who has attained the
     age of majority pursuant to law and acts as the head of family or
     who has the responsibility to run the household affairs living in the
     joint family by engaging in farming, trade, business or any other
     work in various places.

213. Husband or wife may get separated by obtaining partition
     share: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 211, the




                                   118
     husband or wife may, in any of the following circumstances, get
     separated at any time by obtaining his or her partition share:

                    (a)      If the husband or wife expels the wife or husband
                             from the house,

                    (b)      If the husband or wife causes physical or mental
                             torture to the wife or husband.

214. Widow may effect separation by taking her partition share: (1)
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a
     widow may get separated at any time by taking her partition share.

              (2)         If a widow concludes another marriage, the property
     obtained by her by way of partition share shall devolve on the son
     and daughter, if any, born to her from the previous husband and, if
     there is no such a son or daughter, she herself may retain such
     property.

215. Relinquishment of partition share: (1) Any coparcener may, by
     executing a deed to that effect, relinquish his or her partition share,
     with or without taking his or her partition share in part or taking
     some cash or kind only in consideration for his or her partition
     share.

              (2)         While executing a deed on relinquishment of partition
     share pursuant to sub-section (1), if a coparcener has husband, wife,
     or son or daughter having attained the age of majority, the deed on
     relinquishment of partition share shall be deemed to have been
     executed only when consent of such a husband, wife, son or
     daughter has been obtained.




                                          119
            Provided that the entitlement of a minor coparcener to
      partition share may not be relinquished.

            (3)    If a deed on relinquishment of partition share is
      executed pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be deemed as if he or
      she received his or her partition share.

            (4)    A coparcener shall have to appear in person for
      executing a deed on relinquishment of partition share or for
      receiving his or her partition share.

            Provided that if a coparcener is not able to appear in person,
      he or she shall, for that purpose, appoint an authorized attorney in
      accordance with law.

216. Partition to be effected: (1) In partitioning a property in common,
      a deed of partition shall be executed in writing between the
      coparceners, subject to this Chapter.

            (2)    In effecting partition pursuant sub-section (1), partition
      of property in common and debts in common shall be so made that
      partition shares thereof are equal.

            Explanation: For the purposes of his Chapter, the term
      "debts in common" means any debts agreed to by the person acting
      as the head of family or by all coparceners or borrowed by the
      coparceners, who have attained the age of majority and live in the
      undivided family and carry on household work, farming, trade or
      any other work in various places or incurred in such transaction or
      incurred in transaction carried on by the other persons, who have
      attained the age of majority and live in the undivided family as to
      which such persons have consented in writing.


                                     120
           (3)         Partition shall be effected by balancing both high value
     and less value properties, with the consent of all the coparceners,
     and failing such consent, by a lottery.

           (4)         If, in effecting partition, there arises a dispute on any
     property, partition shall be effected after the settlement of the
     dispute.

           Provided that if it takes a long time for the settlement of such
     a dispute, the property in dispute may be kept as undivided property
     and the other properties may be partitioned.

217. Matters to be specified in deed of partition: The following
     matters shall be specified in the deed of partition:

                 (a)      Name, surname, age, address of every coparcener
                          and that of his or her mother, father, grand-father
                          and grand-mother,

                 (b)      Property to be received by the coparceners,

                 (c)      If the part of a coparcener involves debts, moneys
                          receivable, amount of such debts and moneys,

                 (d)      If, upon partition, any coparcener is to live with
                          another coparcener, that details thereof,

                 (e)      A matter to the effect that no coparcener has hidden
                          or concealed any property subject to partition,

                 (f)      If any property is to devolve on a coparcener only,
                          upon the death of the father, mother, husband or
                          wife, details thereof,




                                        121
                 (g)      If the partition share of any coparcener is to be
                          entrusted to any one, details thereof,

                 (h)      Other necessary matters.

218. Deed of partition to be registered: (1) In effecting partition, a
     deed of partition shall be drawn up in presence of witnesses, bear
     signature and thumb-impression of the witness and the coparcener
     and registered in the concerned office, having duly fulfilled the
     legal requirements.

           (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     in cases where partition was effected in household making a
     balance between highly valuable and less valuable property,
     whether or not executing a deed of partition between any
     coparceners before 10 January 1978 (27 Poush 2034) and a
     coparcener has already taken his or her partition share and effected
     transmission thereof or the coparceners have individually possessed
     or sold or transacted their respective partition share of immovable
     property according to partition, partition shall be deemed to have
     been effected in spite of being the deed of partition not registered.

219. Prohibition of providing property without effecting partition:
     (1)   No person acting as the head of family shall, without effecting
     partition, provide a property in common to only a coparcener who
     has not taken partition share or who would be a coparcener.

           Provided that-

                 (1)     That such a person may, with the consent of all the
                         coparceners, provide any property to any coparcener.




                                        122
                  (2)         That such a person may, even without consent of the
                              other coparceners, provide the property to the extent
                              of his or her partition share, to any coparcener.

            (2)         In effecting partition pursuant to this Chapter, the other
      property shall be partitioned by setting off the property provided to
      a coparcener pursuant to clause (1) of the proviso to sub-section (1)
      for the partition share to which the coparcener is entitled.

220. Lawsuit to be filed by setting out inventory of property: (1) If a
      coparcener is desirous of getting separated by setting aside his or
      her partition share, he or she shall file a lawsuit, specifying therein
      the date of separation of bread and board from the other
      coparceners and setting out an inventory of such property and debts
      and assets held in his or her name and that of the other coparceners,
      to the best of his or her knowledge, as is liable to partition.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "date
      of separation of bread and board" means the following date or day:

                        (a)      The date mentioned in the deed of separation of
                                 bread and board,

                        (b)      If there is no deed of separation of bread and
                                 board,   the     date   as   agreed   between    the
                                 coparceners on the separation of bread and board,

                        (c)      If no agreement is reached between the
                                 coparceners pursuant to clause (b), the day
                                 immediately before the day of filing a lawsuit,

                        (d)      Except as otherwise agreed upon, in the case of a
                                 married daughter, the day of her marriage.


                                            123
            (2)         If the deed of separation of bread and board is executed
      between any coparceners only, such a deed shall come into force
      only on the date of its registration.

            (3)         If the person filing a lawsuit pursuant to sub-section (1)
      is unable to submit the inventory of property, he or she shall also
      specify the reason therefor.

            (4)         If a lawsuit is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      concerned person also shall submit a statement of defense, together
      with a statement whether the plaintiff is to be provided with a
      partition share or not and if he or she agrees to provide a partition
      share, together with an inventory of the property held in his or her
      name and the debts and assets.

221. Matters to be set out in inventory: (1) The following matters shall
      be set out in the inventory of the property to be submitted pursuant
      to this Chapter:

                  (a)      The place of location of land, plot No., area and
                           approximate value thereof,

                  (b)      In the case of a house, place of location, plot no,
                           area, Kabal (rooms), Naal (size), storey of the
                           house, whether it is concretely built or mud made,
                           and approximate value thereof,

                  (c)      In the case of a movable property, details and
                           approximate value thereof,

                  (d)      In the case of cash, details thereof, and also details
                           of bank balance, share, debenture, treasury bills, if
                           any,


                                         124
                  (e)      In the case of livestock, details and approximate
                           value thereof,

                  (f)      In the case of gold, silver and jewelries, details and
                           approximate value thereof,

                  (g)      In the case of a motor vehicle, details and
                           approximate value thereof,

                  (h)      Details and approximate value of the properties, if
                           any, other than those referred to clauses (a) through
                           (g).

            (2)         If the value of any property is not set out pursuant to
      sub-section (1) or a dispute arises as to the value thereof, the court
      shall take the basis of the price fixed by the Land Revenue Office,
      in the case of an immovable property, and of the prevailing market
      price for the time being, in the case of a movable property.

222. Partition to be effected by taking inventory: (1) If it appears from
      the lawsuit filed or statement of defense submitted pursuant to
      Section 220 that partition requires to be effected and an inventory
      of property is submitted along with the lawsuit or statement of
      defense, the court shall effect partition, having the coparceners
      executed a deed stating, inter alia, that the property they have
      submitted is the only property to be partitioned and that they have
      not concealed or hidden any other property.

            (2)         If an inventory of property is not submitted along with
      the lawsuit or statement of defense, the court shall, by specifying a
      time-limit, require the coparceners to submit the inventory of the
      property and effect partition by causing the coparceners to execute


                                        125
      a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), if the coparceners submit such
      an inventory within the time-limit so specified.

223. Partition to be effected on the basis of inventory received: (1) If
      a person who in to submit an inventory of property within the time-
      limit referred to in Section 222 fails to submit the inventory or has
      elapsed the time-limit without submitting a statement of defense,
      the court shall effect partition on the basis of the inventory of the
      property submitted by other coparceners.

            (2)    If the partition is effected pursuant to sub-section (1),
      no lawsuit may be entertained on the ground of dissatisfaction with
      the partition share.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
      if a lawsuit is filed for the partition of a property not set out in the
      inventory of the property submitted by the coparceners but
      discovered subsequently, the court shall effect partition of that
      property.

224. Power to take inventory by breaking padlock: If, because of the
      failure of a person to submit an inventory of the property required
      to be submitted by him or her, the inventory of property has to be
      taken by breaking the padlock of the house custody of which is
      taken by him or her, the court may, by opening the padlock in
      presence also of the person holding the key of the house, if he or
      she is present, and if not, in presence of at least two persons
      including the person requesting for partition share and a
      representative of the concerned ward of the Local Level, take an
      inventory of the property found there, by maintaining a record
      thereof.

                                     126
225. Partition to be effected when inventory produced: (1) If the
     person who has to submit an inventory fails to submit the inventory
     or lapses the time-limit by not submitting a statement of defense
     and the person filing a lawsuit requesting for the partition of
     property also fails to submit the inventory of property, the court
     shall, by causing the person filing the lawsuit to execute a deed of
     the same statement, abate the lawsuit subject to the condition that
     the partition shall be effected at the time when an inventory of the
     property is produced.

           (2)    If a lawsuit is abated pursuant to sub-section (1) and
     the person filing the lawsuit makes a petition subsequently,
     accompanied by an inventory, the court shall effect partition
     between the coparceners in accordance with law, on the basis of the
     previous case-file itself.

226. Prohibition of concealing or hiding property: (1) No person shall
     conceal or hide a property that is liable to partition.

           (2)    If a coparcener is subsequently held to have concealed
     or hidden any property which is held in his or her name and is liable
     to partition, at the time of effecting partition or at the time when
     asked by the court to submit an inventory, the coparcener so
     concealing or hiding the property shall have no right to obtain such
     property.

           (3)    The property concealed or hidden under sub-section (2)
     shall be partitioned between the other coparceners.

227. Partition share to be reimbursed: If a coparcener is not allowed
     to own and possess any property falling in his or her partition share



                                    127
     due to the property being defective under law, all the coparceners
     shall proportionately reimburse to him or her property equal to the
     defective property.

228. Partition share not to be exchanged: Except in the case of mutual
     consent among the coparceners, no coparcener shall be entitled to
     exchange any property received by him or her by way of partition
     for the reason that after partition it is disordered, damaged or he or
     she does not prefer it.

229. Partition of pledged or mortgaged property: (1) If a coparcener
     is found to have pledged or mortgaged a property that is liable to
     partition, the court shall, if all the coparceners so agree, effect
     partition of the property by causing the property to be released from,
     or on the condition of having an obligation to release it from, the
     property in common.

           (2)    If all the coparceners do not agree pursuant to sub-
     section (1) and the court finds that the person acting as the head of
     family has pledged or mortgaged the property or that the other
     persons having attained majority living in the undivided family
     have, taking signature and thumb-impression also of the person
     acting as the head of family, pledged or mortgaged it, the court
     shall effect partition of the property by causing the property to be
     released from, or on the condition of having an obligation to release
     it from, the property in common.

           (3)    Save in the cases referred to in sub-section (1) or (2), if
     a coparcener is found to have pledged or mortgaged a property
     liable to partition, the court shall effect partition by causing the
     property to be released from, or on the condition of having an

                                   128
     obligation to release it from, the property falling in his or her
     partition share.

230. Power to withhold property or income until partition is
     effected: If one filing a lawsuit appears to obtain a partition share
     in a case of partition and, after the inventory of property has been
     submitted, makes a petition to the court, praying that the property to
     the extent of his or her partition share or income thereof be
     withheld, the court may withhold the property to the extent of his or
     her partition share or income of such property until partition is
     effected in the fulfillment of the legal requirements.

231. Partition to be so effected as to have provision of way or
     passage: While effecting partition, if there is no access to way or
     passage to a house or land partitioned to a coparcener and if such
     way or passage can be managed from the land of other coparcener,
     partition shall be so effected that the concerned coparcener shall
     have to provide the way or passage for access to such house or land.

232. Debtor not to be specified without consent of creditor: (1)
     Partition shall not be so effected as to give the responsibility of
     payment of the debt of joint family to a sole coparcener without
     consent of the creditor.

           (2)    Even if the responsibility of payment of the debt is
     given solely to any coparcener contrary to sub-section (1), all the
     coparceners shall pay the debt in common equally, if the creditor
     does not so agree.

233. Compensation to be paid if lawsuit filed by person not entitled
     to partition: If a person who is not entitled to receive a partition



                                   129
     share is held to have filed a lawsuit for receiving it, the court shall
     order the law-suit filing person to pay to the defendant a reasonable
     compensation, having regard to the amount in controversy, if set
     out from the case-file, and if such amount is not set out, to the
     status of such a person.

234. Partition share, money or expenditure may be awarded: (1) If a
     person who is entitled to obtain a partition share, money or
     expenditure from any person according to the judgment, files,
     having failed to so receive, a petition in the court of first instance
     which has passed judgment in the case, the court shall, if the parties
     are the same, cause the partition, money or expenditure according
     to the judgment to be awarded as soon as possible.

           (2)         If the partition share, expenditure or money is not
     provided pursuant to sub-section (1), the person who has to provide
     the partition share, money or expenditure shall be caused to pay a
     reasonable compensation as well to the petitioner.

235. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit as
     follows:

                 (a)     Any time, where partition has never been effected
                         or a common general deed has been executed in
                         effecting partition and even though there is no deed
                         where both the parties have enjoyed the property
                         upon making calculation,

                 (b)     Within three months from the date of partition if
                          one is not satisfied with such partition,



                                        130
                  (c)      In case of concealing or hiding of property, till the
                           life of the concerned coparcener,

                  (d)      In the cases other than that referred to in clauses (a),
                           (b) and (c), within six months after the date on
                           which such an act was done or action taken.

236. Partition deemed to be executed: (1) A partition effected pursuant
      to the law prior to the commencement of this Act shall be deemed
      to have been effected pursuant to this Act.

            (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if a person has taken maintenance for living (Jiuni) in consideration
      for his or her partition share prior to the commencement of this Act,
      the person shall be deemed to have taken his or her partition share.




                                        131
                               Chapter-11

                    Provisions Relating to Succession

237. Succession deemed to be opened: Upon the death of a person,
     succession to his or her property shall be deemed to be opened.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     "succession" means devolution of liabilities and rights in regard to
     debt, wealth and property of the deceased upon his or her heirs in
     accordance with law.

238. Heir entitled to succession: Where succession to a person's
     property is opened, his or her nearest heir shall be entitled to such
     succession.

239. Order of preference of heirs for succession: (1) The order of
     preference of nearest heirs for succession shall, subject to the other
     Sections of this Chapter, be as follows:

              (a)     Husband or wife living in the undivided family,

              (b)     Son, daughter, widow daughter-in-law living in the
                      undivided family,

              (c)     Father, mother, step mother, grand-son, grand-
                      daughter, grand-daughter-in-law, on the side of son
                      or daughter, living in the undivided family,

              (d)     Separated husband, wife, son, daughter, father,
                      mother, step-mother,

              (e)     Separated grand-son, grand-daughter from the son's
                      generation,

              (f)     Separated grand-father, grand-mother,


                                    132
                  (g)      Grand-father, grand-mother, elder brother, younger
                           brother, elder sister, younger sister, widow elder
                           brother’s wife or younger brother’s wife living in
                           the undivided family,

                  (h)      Uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, living in the joint
                           family,

                  (i)      Separated elder brother, younger brother, elder
                           sister, younger sister, widow elder brother's wife or
                           younger brother's wife.

            (2)         So long as the person who is in the first order of
      preference referred to in sub-section (1) at the time when
      succession to one’s property is open is serving the person in the
      subsequent order of preference shall not be entitled to succession.

            (3)         If there are more than one heir in the same order of
      preference pursuant to sub-section (1), all of them shall equally be
      entitled to the succession.

            (4)         If any heir in the order of preference entitled to
      succession does not intend to succeed, the other heirs in the same
      order shall be entitled to succession, and even any heir in that order
      of preference does not intend to accept succession, the heir in the
      successive order of preference shall be entitled to the succession.

240. Distant heir entitled to succession: If a person dies when he or she
      was staying with any distant heir after taking his or her partition
      share of property in spite of having his or her nearer heir and
      succession to him or her is open, the heir with whom that person
      was so staying shall be entitled to his or her property succession.


                                        133
241. Maintaining (Shyahar samhar) and caretaking heir entitled to
     succession: If a nearer heir has not maintained and taken care of a
     person but a distant heir has done so, the distant heir who has so
     maintained and taken care of him or her shall be entitled to
     succession.

242. Separated heir entitled to succession: (1) If a person dies when
     that person was staying with any heir who has lived separately,
     after taking his or her partition share of property, because an un-
     separated heir has not maintained (Shyahar samhar) and taken care
     of that person, such separated heir shall be entitled to the succession
     of that person.

           (2)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a person dies when that person was staying with any heir only for
     few days, without taking his or her partition share of property, the
     heir with whom that person had so stayed shall not be entitled to
     succession of that person.

243. Maintaining (Shyahar samhar) and caretaking person entitled
     to succession: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
     this Chapter, if another person has maintained (Shyahar samhar)
     and taken care of the deceased because the heir has not done so, the
     person who has so maintained (Shyahar samhar) and taken care of
     shall be entitled to such succession.

244. Not to be obliged to accept succession: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, no person shall be
     obliged to accept a succession.




                                   134
           (2)         A person who declines to accept a succession shall
     give information thereof in writing to the concerned District Court
     within a period of three years of the devolution of succession.

           (3)         If a person does not accept a succession within the
     period referred to in sub-section (2), such succession shall be
     deemed to have been devolved upon the other heir in the successive
     order of preference for succession.

           (4)         Even if a person does not accept a succession pursuant
     to sub-section (1), he or she shall have to conduct obsequies of the
     deceased in accordance with the rites and rituals.

245. Disqualified for succession: Notwithstanding anything contained
     elsewhere in this Chapter, if a person who kills, or causes the death
     of, another person with intent to serve any premeditation or with
     ulterior motive to obtain succession, such person and the heir to the
     person who so kills or causes death shall be disqualified from the
     succession of the deceased or his or her heir.

246. Obligations and rights of person upon whom succession is
     devolved: (1) The obligations and rights of the person upon whom
     succession is devolved shall be as follows:

                 (a)      To perform, or cause to be performed, funeral and
                          obsequies rites of the deceased according to his or
                          her rites and rituals,

                 (b)      To repay the debt borrowed by the deceased to the
                          creditor,

                 (c)      To have right over the debt lent and investment
                          made by the deceased.


                                        135
           (2)    If the funeral and obsequies rites of a deceased has
     been performed by a person other than one who is entitled to the
     succession, the person so entitled shall pay the costs incurred in the
     performance of funeral and obsequies rites of the deceased and
     additional twenty-five percent of such costs to the person who has
     performed such rites.

           Provided that if any person has, instead of doing on his or her
     own, caused another person to perform the funeral and obsequies
     rites of the deceased, he or she shall be liable to pay only the actual
     costs incurred in the performance of such rites.

247. Creditor may recover debt: If succession to one’s property is
     opened and one has creditors, such creditors may recover their
     debts and liabilities from the person upon whom succession has
     devolved.

        Provided that no heir shall be obliged to pay debts and liabilities
     in excess of the deceased's property succeeded to by him or her.

248. Local Level to receive property under succession: (1) If
     succession to the property of a person is opened and he or she has
     no heir or his or her heir declines to accept such succession, the
     property of the dead person remaining after deducting the costs
     incurred in the performance of his or her funeral and obsequies rites
     and even after payment of debts due to his or her creditors shall be
     devolved on the Local Level.

           (2)    If a person dies and has no heir but has property, a
     person who performs his or her obsequies or maintains his or her




                                    136
books and accounts shall immediately give a notice thereof to the
Local Level.

      (3)      If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (2), the
Local Level shall prepare an inventory of the properties of the
deceased in witness of at two local persons and forward the
inventory, accompanied by a copy of the memorandum (Muchulka)
executed to that effect, to the concerned district level administrative
office.

      (4)      If a memorandum, along with the inventory of
properties, is received pursuant to sub-section (3) and the address of
the deceased is traced out, such an office shall send a notice in
accordance with law to the heir of the deceased to appear to receive
the property of the deceased within a period of three months.

      (5)      If the heir does not accept the property pursuant to sub-
section (1) or the heir of the deceased does not appear within the
time-limit referred to in sub-section (4) or the address of such heir
is not traced out, such an office shall publish a notice in a national
newspaper, inviting his or her heir, if any, to appear to claim the
property of the deceased, within a period of thirty five days.

      (6)      If the heir of the deceased appears within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (5), the property that remains after
deducting therefrom the expenses incurred in the performance of
obsequies of the deceased or providing such expenses to the person
having performed such obsequies, and ten percent of the property,
shall be returned to the concerned heir.




                                137
           (7)    If no heir of the deceased appears within the time-limit
     referred to in sub-section (5) or his or her address is not traced out,
     the property that remains after deducting therefrom the expenses
     incurred in the performance of obsequies of the deceased, which
     amount is to be provided to the person having performed such
     obsequies, shall devolve on the concerned Local Level.

           (8)    The concerned heir or the office under sub-section (3)
     shall hand over the property receivable by the Local Level pursuant
     to sub-section (1) or (7) to the Local Level in accordance with law.

           (9)    The Local Level shall use the property that it has
     received pursuant to this Section for public interest.

249. Succession to property of foreigner died in Nepal: (1) If a
     foreigner who dies in Nepal has property without heir in Nepal, a
     person who performs his or her obsequies or maintains his or her
     books and accounts shall immediately give a notice thereof to the
     nearby Local Level.

           (2)    If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     Local Level shall prepare an inventory of the properties of the
     deceased in witness of at two local persons and forward the
     inventory, accompanied by a copy of the memorandum (Muchulka)
     executed to that effect, to the concerned district level administrative
     office.

           (3)    If a memorandum, along with the inventory of
     properties, is received pursuant to sub-section (2), such an office
     shall immediately give information thereof to the Federal Ministry
     of Home Affairs.



                                   138
         (4)   If information referred to in sub-section (3) is received,
the Federal Ministry of Home Affairs shall also send a notice, in
accordance with law, through the diplomatic channel of the
concerned country, to the heir of the dead person to appear to
receive the properties of the deceased within four months.

         (5)   If information under sub-section (3) is received upon
the death of a citizen of a country having no diplomatic relation
with Nepal, the Federal Ministry of Home Affairs shall publish a
notice in a national daily English newspaper for receiving such
property within six months, and the Federal Ministry of Home
Affairs shall also put such notice on its website.

         (6)   If the heir of the deceased appears within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (4) or (5), the property that remains after
deducting therefrom the expenses incurred in the performance of
obsequies of the dead person or providing such expenses the person
having performed such obsequies, and ten percent of the property,
shall be returned to the concerned heir.

         (7)   If no heir of the dead person appears within the time-
limit referred to in sub-section (4) or (5) or his or her address is not
traced out, the property that remains after providing the expenses
incurred in the performance of obsequies of the deceased to the
person having performed such obsequies shall devolve on the Local
Level.

         (8)   The property received by the Local Level pursuant to
this Section shall be used only for public interest.




                                139
250. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of
      limitation, if any, set forth elsewhere in this Chapter, and in the
      other cases, within a period of three years after the date on which
      the succession is opened.




                                  140
                                   Part-4

                        Laws Relating to Property

                                 Chapter-1

                General Provisions Relating to Property

251. Deemed to be property: Any cash, goods or work shall be deemed
     to be a property if such cash, goods or action can be used or
     transacted in or the title thereto can be transferred by way of
     purchase, sale or otherwise or any benefit can be derived therefrom.

           Explanation: Except otherwise provided for in this Act, the
     term "goods" means a physical property capable of being purchased
     or sold.

252. Property deemed to be in movable or immovable form: A
     property shall be deemed to be in either movable or immovable
     form irrespective of its physical or non-physical, tangible or
     intangible form.

253. Property deemed to be immovable: (1) The following property
     shall be deemed to be an immovable property:

                 (a)    A building or land or structure fixed thereto,

                 (b)    Any goods attached to a building or land
                        permanently,

                 (c)    A mine, stone or mineral embedded in land,

                 (d)    Natural water, surface water and underground
                        water,

                 (e)    A building or other structure so made permanently
                        that it can float over a river, lake or pond,

                                     141
                 (f)   A standing tree, plant or fruit tree or fruit or
                       flower growing on such a tree, plant or fruit tree or
                       crops in the land, or

                 (g)   A movable property attached to an immovable
                       property.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if any structure, goods or any part thereof, fixed or attached to any
     immovable property gets or is detached or unfixed in any manner,
     the structure, goods or part so detached or unfixed shall be deemed
     to be a movable property.

254. Property deemed to be movable: The following property shall be
     deemed to be a movable property:

           (a)    Cash or goods that can be transacted as cash or foreign
                  currency,

           (b)    Gold, silver, jewelry, Ratna, gold or silver ornament or
                  precious stone,

           (c)    Other good that can be moved from one place to
                  another, except those referred in clause (a) or (b),

           (d)    A bond, security, promissory note, bill of exchange,
                  letter of credit or other negotiable instrument or a
                  benefit derived therefrom,

           (e)    Intellectual property,

           (f)    A right in security,

           (g)    A trade good-will or franchise,




                                    142
           (h)    A property other than the immovable property.

255. Classification of property according to ownership: The property
     shall, according to the ownership and the form of use thereof be
     classified as follows:

           (a)    Private property,

           (b)    Property in common,

           (c)    Joint property,

           (d)    Community property,

           (e)    Public property,

           (f)    Government property,

           (g)    Trust property.

256. Property deemed to be private property: (1) Any of the
     following properties owned by any person or properties accrued
     therefrom shall be deemed to be a private property of such a person:

                 (a)   Property earned by way of his or her knowledge,
                       skills or effort,

                 (b)   Property acquired by way of donation, bequeath,
                       or succession,

                 (c)   Property acquired by way of a lottery or gift,

                 (d)   Property acquired by way of remuneration,
                       gratuity, pension, medical expense, provident fund,
                       insurance or other social security,




                                     143
                 (e)   Property acquired by way of intellectual property
                       or royalty,

                 (f)   Property acquired in any manner whatsoever while
                       living apart by separating bread and board in
                       accordance with law or while managing one’s
                       accommodation at one’s cost despite not so living
                       apart,

                 (g)   Property earned or acquired by a woman prior to
                       marriage or acquired from her parental side at the
                       time of marriage or accrued therefrom,

                 (h)   Property so granted to a woman by the husband or
                       with consent of all coparceners of the husband
                       side that she will have exclusive right in it or
                       movable or immovable property received from the
                       relatives or friends of the husband side and
                       property accrued therefrom,

                 (i)   Property which, according to law, is considered to
                       be the exclusive private property of a person.

           (2)     Any person shall be entitled to exclusively deal with
     his or her private property, subject to this Act.

257. Property deemed to be property in common: (1) Any of the
     following properties or property accrued therefrom shall be deemed
     to be the property in common, irrespective of such property being
     owned by any coparcener whosoever, out of the coparceners,
     subject to Section 256:

           (a)     Property inherited from ancestors,


                                     144
           (b)   Property owned by the coparceners except the private
                 property,

           (c)   Property earned by the coparceners from the farming,
                 industry, trade or business in common or property
                 accrued therefrom.

           (2)   Except where separated in accordance with law, any
     property earned by the husband or wife or property accrued
     therefrom shall be deemed to be the property in common of the
     husband or wife.

           (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Chapter, any property earned by the parents for the purpose of
     partition between the parents and their children shall also be
     deemed to be the property in common.

           (4)   The use of, and transfer of right in, the property in
     common and other provisions shall be as set forth in the other
     Chapters of this Act.

258. Property deemed to be joint property: (1) Any property owned
     by two or more persons except the coparceners living in a joint
     family or property accrued therefrom shall be deemed to be a joint
     property.

           (2)   The right or share of a joint holder in the joint property
     shall be as set forth in a deed setting out such rights and share, and
     failing such a deed, the holders of that property shall be deemed to
     have equal rights and share.




                                    145
           (3)   The use and management of, transfer of title to, and
     other provisions relating to, the joint property shall be governed by
     this Chapter and the other Chapters of this Act.

259. Trees, plants or goods on boundary to be deemed joint
     property: Except as otherwise proved, the trees, plants or goods
     lying on the boundary of two or more owners of adjoining lands
     shall be deemed to be the joint property of all owners.

260. Management, protection and maintenance of joint property: (1)
     The management, protection and maintenance of a joint property
     shall be made as per the consent of the owners of that property.

           (2)   Failing consent between the owners in relation to the
     management, protection and maintenance of a joint property
     pursuant to sub-section (1), the management, protection and
     maintenance of the joint property shall be made according to the
     decision of majority members.

           (3)   Failing a majority opinion between the owners in
     relation to the management, protection and maintenance of the joint
     property pursuant to sub-section (2), the owner who has the largest
     right or share in that property shall make its management,
     protection and maintenance.

           Provided that if the owners have equal right, all owners shall
     have to make management, protection and maintenance of such
     property on an equal basis.

           (4)   Expenses incurred in the management, protection and
     maintenance of the joint property, if any, made by any owner




                                   146
     pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3) shall be borne by all owners in
     proportion to their respective right or share.

           (5)    The owner who does not manage, protect and maintain
     the joint property pursuant to sub-section (4) shall pay the expenses
     incurred in the management, protection and maintenance of that
     property to the owner who has made such management, protection
     and maintenance within a period of one year.

           (6)    If any owner fails to pay the expenses incurred in the
     management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
     within the period referred to in sub-section (5), the owner who has
     made management, protection and maintenance thereof shall be
     entitled to purchase the right and share of that other owner in that
     property at the prevailing price. Such purchaser of the joint property
     may deduct management and maintenance expenses of his or her
     portion.

261. Prohibition of alteration in joint property without consent: Any
     alteration in a joint property or any change in its form may not be
     made without consent of all the owners of the joint property.

262. Legal action or defense may be made by any owner of joint
     property: (1) If it is necessary to institute a legal action against any
     person or defend a case in relation to the protection of a joint
     property, all owners shall make such institution or defense.

           (2)    If all owners are not available as referred to in sub-
     section (1), any owner may, on behalf of him or her or the other
     owners, institute legal action against any person or defend any case.




                                    147
263. Separation of one’s share from joint property: (1) Any owner of
     a joint property may separate his or her right or share therein from
     the other owners at any time.

           (2)     The separation of a joint property referred to in sub-
     section (1) shall be effected in accordance with the consent of all
     the owners.

           (3)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
     or (2), if the separation of any joint property results either in a
     substantial loss to the other owners or in a disorder in the form of
     that property, such separation may not be made.

           (4)     If any joint property cannot be separated owing to the
     circumstance referred to in sub-section (3), the owners of that
     property shall sell such property and divide the proceeds of sale
     between them in proportion to their respective right and share
     therein.

           (5)     If any joint property cannot be sold in accordance with
     sub-section (4) or all the owners do not agree to sell it and any
     owner intends to buy such property, such an owner may exclusively
     own it by paying the price of that property to the other owners in
     the same proportion.

           (6)     If more than one owner intend to buy the joint property
     pursuant to sub-section (5), the owner who agrees to pay the highest
     price shall be entitled to purchase such property.

264. Provisions relating to community, public, government and trust
     properties: The provisions relating to, and ownership, use,
     management, and transfer of right in, and other provisions of, the


                                     148
     community, public, government and trust properties shall be as set
     forth in the other Chapters of this Act.

265. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
     action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
     months after the date on which such an act was done or action was
     taken.




                                   149
                               Chapter-2
          Provisions Relating to Ownership and Possession
266. Ownership to be deemed: If a person acquires the right in any
     property in accordance with law, his or her ownership in that
     property shall be deemed.
288. Right of owner: Any person, in capacity of the owner of any
     property, shall have the following right, subject to laws:
           (a)   To use the property,
           (b)   To sell or otherwise transfer the title to the property to
                 any other person,
           (c)   To mortgage or pledge the property in any manner,
           (d)   To deal in the property,
           (e)   To take benefits of the property in any manner
                 whatsoever,
           (f)   To make any kind of physical structure, wall or fence
                 or delimit boundary, in his or her land or change the
                 form of any property or otherwise protect it,
           (g)   To use his or her land or part below its surface or goods
                 therein or sky above its surface,
           (h)   To destroy or dispose of property in any manner,
           (i)   To institute a legal action in any manner in relation to
                 the acquisition or security of the property.
268. Possessory right to be deemed: If a person holds a property with
     him or her lawfully with intention to possess the property, the
     person shall be deemed to have the possessory right over such
     property.
269. When possessory right can be acquired: (1) The possessory right
     may be acquired over any property in the following manner:

                                   150
               (a)   By holding the property in the capacity of its owner,
               (b)   By acquiring the property owned by another person, in
                     accordance with law,
               (c)   By obtaining consent to have possessory right.
               (2)   Only the possessory right which is acquired in good
      faith, peacefully or openly shall be deemed to have been acquired
      lawfully.
270. Person competent to acquire possessory right: (1) A person may
      acquire the possessory right either in person or through his or her
      agent.
               (2)   A person who is incompetent or quasi-competent may
      acquire the possessory right through his or her guardian or curator.
271. Rights of possessor: (1) A person, in the capacity of a possessor,
      shall, subject to law, have the following rights:
               (a)   To uninterruptedly possess the property in his or her
                     possession, subject to the laws in force or the contract,
                     if any, entered into in relation to the property,
               (b)   To use any benefits of the property in his or her
                     possession.
               (2)   In the event of acquisition of, by a person, the
      possessory right in bona fide over any property owned by anyone
      else, the person shall be entitled to reimbursement from the owner
      of that property for essential expenses incurred in the management,
      maintenance or care of (rekh dekh) such property while it was
      under his or her possessory right.
               (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
      the former possessor shall be entitled to retain such property with



                                      151
     him or her unless and until the expenses referred to in that sub-
     section are reimbursed.
           (4)    If a bona fide possessor of any property not in his or
     her ownership has attached any goods to such property, the
     possessor shall be entitled to detach or take out the goods so
     attached by him or her from the property without tempering with
     such property.
272. Circumstances when possessory right is extinguished: The
     possessory right of a person over a property shall be deemed to
     have been extinguished in any of the following circumstances:
           (a)    If the person abandons the property,
           (b)    If the person transfers the property,
           (c)    If the property gets totally destroyed or becomes
     useless.
273. Adverse possessory right to be deemed: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if any person has
     possessed any movable property or land owned by anyone else,
     since more than three years ago in the case of the movable property
     and thirty years ago in the case of the land as if the property or land
     were owned by himself or herself, that person shall be deemed to
     have adverse possessory right over such property or land.
           Provided that:
                  (1)   No adverse possessory right may be acquired
                        over a government, public, community or trust
                        land despite the length of the period of
                        possession.
                  (2)   Where a contract or other law provides for
                        separate provisions in relation to any property or

                                   152
                           land, such provisions shall be applicable to such
                           property or land.
           (2)    If any person acquires the adverse possessory right
     over any property pursuant to sub-section (1), the person may
     obtain ownership over such property in his or her name.
           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a property or land is possessed without knowledge of its owner,
     secretly or forcibly, this Section shall not apply.
           (4)    In computing the period pursuant to this Section, it
     shall be computed from the date of the commencement of this Act.
274. Compensation to be paid: (1) If           any   person   possesses   any
     property forcibly, with mala fide intention or secretly, the person
     shall return the benefits derived from that possession and such
     property to the concerned person and pay a reasonable
     compensation for any loss caused to the property due to his or her
     negligence in the course of possessing such property.
           (2)    If any property owned by anyone else is lost or
     damaged during the continuance of the possessory right of a person
     over the property, the person shall pay compensation for such
     property to the concerned person.
275. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
     within three months after the date of knowledge of commission of
     such act or action.




                                     153
                                Chapter-3

                  Provisions Relating to Uses of Property

276. Prohibition of use, temperance or acquisition of other's
      property: (1) No person shall use other's property without consent
      of that other person.

            (2)     No person shall temper with other's property by closing
      the road or exit of the other person or doing any act or construction
      on the border of his or her land or otherwise.

            (3)     No person shall acquire other's property without
      consent of that person.

            Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in accordance
      with law, acquire property of any person for public interest.

            (4)     No person shall enter other's house and compound
      without consent of any person except in accordance with law.

277. Property to be inviolable: (1) No person shall encroach or trespass
      other's property by way of overlapping, pressing or otherwise.

            (2)     If any person takes possession of other's property by
      way of any act referred to in sub-section (1), that person shall be
      deemed to have encroached or trespassed such property.

278. Safety measures to be adopted: A person shall, while doing any
      work on his or her house or land, adopt safety measures in order to
      avoid any loss or damage or effect to the neighbor's house or land
      in any manner.

            Provided that, except where a business transaction is carried
      on by any neighbor, matters such as gas, smell, smoke or noise of


                                    154
     general nature emitted or produced from the use by the neighbor of
     his or her house or land shall not be deemed to have caused a loss
     or damage or effect to the house or land.

279. Prohibition of building a house in other's land without consent:
     (1) No person shall build a house in a land without obtaining
     written consent of the owner of that land.

           (2)     If any person builds a house in a land without
     obtaining written consent of the owner of that land, the land-owner
     may, if he or she so desires, purchase the house on payment of the
     price that is less by up to twenty-five percent of the market price of
     that house.

           (3)     If the land-owner does not purchase such house
     pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner may, if the owner so
     consents, purchase the land on payment of the price that is higher
     by up to twenty-five percent of the market price of the land where
     the house is located.

           (4)     If both parties do not agree to purchase and sell the
     house or land pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3), the person who has
     built the house shall demolish the house and take away his or her
     materials within a period of three months of the date on which the
     house was so built.

           (5)     If the house is not demolished within the period
     referred to in sub-section (4), such a house shall belong to the
     landowner.

280. To leave land while putting window: If a person or government
     body has to build a house by putting a window or door towards the


                                   155
     neighbor's land, the person or body shall leave the land according to
     the standards specified by the concerned body.

281. Prohibition of channeling water of house or roof: No person
     shall channel the water of his or her house or roof to other's house
     or land or a public road.

282. Prohibition of making safety tank adjoining to neighbor's land:
     (1) No person shall construct a safety tank by adjoining it to the
     neighbor's land.

           (2)    If a person has to construct a safety tank in his or her
     land, he or she shall leave at least the land according to the
     standards specified by the concerned body, except in cases where
     the neighbor's consent is available.

283. To leave land while digging well or Kuwa: In digging a well or a
     small (Kuwa) in one's land, one shall leave the land so that the
     distance of at least one meter can be maintained from the
     neighbor’s land.

284. Prohibition of planting trees or plants causing effect: (1) No
     person shall plant a tree or plants in such a way so that it causes
     effects to other's house, land or property.

           (2)    If any tree or plant planted by a person in one's land
     cause any effect by expanding to other's house, land or property, the
     person who has planted such tree or plants shall cut the branches or
     roots of the tree or plant in such manner as not to cause loss or
     damage to that person's house, land or property.

           (3)    If a person who has planted such tree or plants fails to
     cut off the branches or roots of the tree or plants pursuant to sub-


                                   156
     section (2), the person who is affected therefrom may cut off the
     branches or roots of such tree or plants on his or her own.

285. Compensation to be recovered: If any damage is caused to any
     person from any act done or action taken by any person under this
     Chapter, the damage sustaining person shall be entitled to recover a
     reasonable compensation from the person who has done such act.

286. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     six months after the date of knowledge of the commission of such
     act or action.




                                   157
                                Chapter-4

  Provisions Relating to Cultivation, Use and Registration of Land

287. Prohibition of use of other's land: No person shall cultivate or use,
      or cause to be cultivated or used, any land in which another person
      has right, possession and ownership, without consent of that person.

288. Requirement to allow land to be used for ditch: (1) If a person
      who needs to construct a ditch through other's land to cultivate land
      requests for land, the concerned owner of the land shall provide the
      land for the construction of the ditch through the place where the
      concerned landowner considers appropriate.

            (2)    In consideration for the land provided for construction
      of a ditch through it pursuant to sub-section (1), the person who
      constructs the ditch shall provide a substitute land, amount
      according to the prevailing price of the land used in the construction
      of the ditch or reasonable compensation to the concerned landowner.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
      if a ditch is constructed in a public or government land, it is not
      required to provide a substitute land, price of land or compensation
      for the land used in construction of the ditch.

289. Prohibition of using whole water of river or stream: No owner
      of a land shall so use the whole water of the river or stream which
      originates or flows from the land as to prevent the owner of
      downstream land from using the same or as to endanger the life of
      aquatic animals in the river or stream or as to adversely affect the
      ecological balance.




                                    158
290. Prohibition of making new ditch affecting irrigated field: No
      person shall construct a new ditch above a land irrigated by a ditch
      already made and in operation in a manner to significantly lessen
      the volume of water in that land.

291. Use and allocation of ditch water: (1) A person who has spent
      labor or money in the construction of a ditch shall have the first
      priority to the ditch water for the cultivation of land.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      in a place where people have been using the water according to
      agreed division between them from the time immemorial, all people
      shall be entitled to use the ditch water according to the division.

            (3)    If the water is sufficient for or no longer required for a
      person who uses the water pursuant to sub-section (1), another
      person shall be entitled to use the ditch water for cultivating the
      land irrespective of the person whom the ditch belongs to.

            (4)    If the land of a person is irrigated and then water
      overflows to other’s land, such water may be used even without the
      consent of the concerned land-owner, and no claim shall entertained
      for the same.

292. Prohibition of alteration in ditch without consent: If any ditch is
      constructed only in the land of a person and other persons have also
      been using the ditch, the owner of land where such ditch is situated
      shall not be allowed to alter the ditch without consent of the other
      persons using it.

293. One who does not make labor or expenses in making ditch not
      allowed to use water: (1) While making a new ditch or repairing


                                     159
      an old ditch, all persons who use the water of such ditch shall make
      necessary labor or expenses in proportion to their respective land.

            (2)    A person who does not make labor or expenses in
      making a new ditch or repairing an old one pursuant to sub-section
      (1) shall not be entitled to use the water of such a ditch.

294. Construction of ditch or use of water with mutual consent:
      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if
      there is a separate agreement between the concerned land-owners or
      those who make a ditch or who are users of water in relation to the
      construction of ditch or using of water for the cultivation of land,
      the ditch may be made or water used according to that agreement.

295. Cultivation of land adjacent to river bank: If a river or stream
      enters in a land and divides it or cuts a land, the land shall belong to
      its owner and may be cultivated by the owner after the river or
      stream changes its course and leaves the land.

296. Prohibition of registration: No person shall register, or cause to
      be registered, other’s land in his or her name.

297. Transmission and registration and deregistration to be effected:
      (1) If a person needs to have transfer of a land on the death of its
      registration holder or to have registration and deregistration of a
      land in which the person has got right in any manner, the concerned
      person shall submit an application to the Land Revenue Office and
      obtain transmission and registration and deregistration of the matter
      within thirty-five days of the occurrence of such an event.

            (2)    If a person submits an application for transmission and
      registration and deregistration of the matter after the expiry of the


                                     160
     time-limit referred to in sub-section (1), the Land Revenue Office
     shall execute the transmission and registration of such land in the
     applicant's name by collecting the fee of one hundred rupees
     irrespective of the length of time after such expiration.

298. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
     within six months after the date of knowledge of commission of
     such an act or action.




                                   161
                              Chapter-5

    Provisions Relating to Government, Public and Community
                              Properties

299. Property deemed to be government property: The following
     property title to which belongs to, or which is owned, controlled by,
     or subject to, the Government of Nepal, Province Government and
     Local Government shall be deemed to be the government property:

           (a)   Government houses, buildings or lands,

           (b)   Roads, paths or railways,

           (c)   Forests, or trees or trees, bushes in forests,

           (d)   Rivers, rivulets, streams, lakes, ponds and banks
                 thereof,

           (e)   Canals, ditches or uncultivated, barren lands,

           (f)   Mines or minerals,

           (g)   Himalaya, mountains, rocks, sandy lands, public
                 gardens,

           (h)   Any Property other than a public, community, trust
                 property or any one's property.

300. Property deemed to be public property: (1) The following
     property which is for public purpose shall be deemed to be the
     public property:

           (a)   Houses, lands, sewerage or roads having been used
                 since ancient times,

           (b)   Wells, water conduits, shores, ponds and banks thereof,



                                   162
           (c)    Exits for chattels, pasture lands, Kharka, graveyards,
                  Chihan, Samadhisthal, Kabristan and lands where
                  these are located,

           (d)    Inns, Pauwas, Dewals, religious meditation sites,
                  memorials, temples, shrines, Chaitya, monasteries,
                  Stupas, churches, Chowk, Dawali, Chautari or lands
                  where these are located,

           (e)    Lands where fairs, markets and public entertainment or
                  sports sites are located,

           (f)    Private property provided by any person for public
                  purposes,

           (g)    Such other property as prescribed to be the public
                  property by the Government of Nepal, by a notification
                  in the Nepal Gazette.

           (2)    The ownership of the public property shall vest in the
     public body or the Government of Nepal.

301. Property deemed to be community property: Any land held by a
     community for its use, any structure built in such land or other
     property owned by it shall be deemed to be the community property.

302. Details to be updated: (1) The Land Revenue Office shall prepare
     and update the following details in relation to the government and
     public properties situated within the district:

           (a)    The location where the government or public
                  properties are situated, plot number and area, in the
                  case of a land, and situation of the house, if any,



                                    163
           (b)      If the government or public properties are possessed by,
                    or subjected to, any body or organization, details
                    thereof,

           (c)      Other necessary details.

           (2)      The Local Level shall render necessary assistance to
     the Land Revenue Office in preparing the details referred to in sub-
     section (1).

           (3)      After the preparation of the details pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the Land Revenue Office shall forward a copy thereof
     to the concerned district level administrative office and Local Level.


           (4)      The Local Level shall collect and update the details
     referred to in sub-section (1) in relation to the community
     properties situated within its jurisdiction and forward a copy thereof
     to the concerned Land Revenue Office.

303. Land ownership registration certificate to be provided: (1) If
     any government land is held in the name of a government body or
     public organization, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land
     ownership registration certificate of such land in the name of such
     body or organization and provide it to such body or organization.

           (2)      If any land is available to a community in accordance
     with law, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land ownership
     registration certificate of such land in the name of such community
     and provide it to that community.

304. Obligation to protect government, public or community
     properties: (1) The Government of Nepal, public organization or


                                     164
     community holding the right in, possession, custody of, and control
     over, the government, public or community properties shall itself
     protect such properties.

           (2)    To protect government and public properties shall be
     responsibility of the concerned district level administrative office
     and Local Level.

           (3)    The concerned community and Local Level shall be
     responsible for the protection of the community property.

305. Prohibition of registration of government, public or community
     properties in individual's name: (1) No person shall register, or
     cause to be registered, any government, public or community
     property in his or her name.

           (2)    If a person registers, or causes to be registered, any
     government, public or community property in the name of any
     individual, such registration shall, ipso facto, be void.

           (3)    If a complaint is filed as to the registration of any
     government, public or community property in any individual's name,
     the concerned Land Revenue Office shall summon the presence of
     the registration-holder also and inquire into the matter, as required,
     and make necessary decision within six months after the date of
     filing the complaint.

           (4)    If the registration of any government, public or
     community property in any individual's name is annulled pursuant
     to this Section, the Land Revenue Officer shall make necessary
     entries in the records maintained in his or her office and give




                                    165
     information thereof to the concerned district level administrative
     office and Local Level.

           (5)    The Land Revenue Office shall punish a person who
     registers, or causes to be registered, any government, public or
     community property in contravention of this Section with a fine of
     twenty-five thousand to one hundred thousand rupees.

           (6)    The registration of government, public or community
     property in oneself or some individual's name which in itself is
     offence as per prevailing laws, nothing written in this section shall
     be an obstacle to take action in offence related to it.

306. Prohibition of possession or cultivation of government, public
     or community land: (1) No person shall possess any government,
     public or community land by way of overlapping, encroachment,
     surrounding or otherwise.

           (2)    No person shall, except with the permission of the
     Government of Nepal, concerned public organization or community,
     cultivate, or cause to be cultivated, any government, public or
     community land.

           (3)    If any person possesses or cultivates any government,
     public or community land in contravention of sub-section (1) or (2),
     the concerned Land Revenue Office, in the case of the government
     or public land, and the concerned Local Level, in the case of the
     community land, shall separate such land, recover the crops yielded
     in the land from that person and vacate the land.

           (4)    The Land Revenue Office may punish any person who
     possesses or cultivates any government, public or community land


                                    166
     in contravention of this Section with a fine not exceeding ten
     thousand rupees.

307. Prohibition of building structure: (1) No person shall build any
     structure in any government, public or community land, for any
     personal or public purpose.

           Provided that any structure may be constructed as considered
     appropriate by the Government of Nepal, in the case of a
     government or public land, and by the concerned community for
     public purpose, in the case of a community land.

           (2)   If any person initiate to construct any structure in any
     government, public or community land in contravention of sub-
     section (1), the concerned Chief District Officer or Local Level
     shall stop such work immediately.

           (3)   If any person has already constructed any structure in
     any government, public or community land in contravention of sub-
     section (1), the concerned Chief District Officer shall give a time-
     limit of fifteen days to the main person having constructed the
     structure to demolish such structure.

           (4)   The main person having constructed such a structure
     shall demolish the structure at his or her own expense within the
     time-limit given pursuant to sub-section (3).

           (5)   If the main person having constructed such a structure
     fails to demolish the structure within the time-limit given pursuant
     to sub-section (3), the concerned Chief District Officer shall
     demolish such a structure.




                                   167
           (6)    If the Chief District Officer demolishes any structure
     pursuant to sub-section (5), the Chief District Officer may recover
     the expenses incurred in such demolition from the main person
     having constructed the structure and punish him or her with a fine
     not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees.

           (7)    It shall be the duty of the concerned police office to
     render necessary assistance, if any, sought by the Local Level in
     stopping the construction of any structure or in demolishing any
     already built structure pursuant to this Section.

308. Power to transfer government property: The Government of
     Nepal may transfer any government property owned and possessed
     by, or subjected to, any body or organization to any other body or
     organization, with the permission of such an owner body or
     organization.

309. Conversion of community property into public property: (1) If
     any community holding a community property does not use it or
     submits an application bearing signature or thumb impression of
     each of the main persons of all families of such a community,
     setting out that it is not necessary to use such community property
     in its purpose, to the concerned Land Revenue Office, the
     concerned Land Revenue Officer may make necessary inquiry into
     the matter and convert such property into the public property.

           (2)    In the event of conversion of any community property
     into the public property pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned
     Land Revenue Officer shall make necessary entries in the records
     maintained in his or her office and give information thereof to the
     concerned district level administrative office and Local Level.

                                   168
310. To reward complainant: (1) Any person whosoever may make a
     complaint with the concerned body on the matters of registration, or
     causing registration, of a government, public or community
     property, or possession, use or cultivation of a land under such
     property or construction work done in such land, in contravention
     of this Chapter.

            (2)   If, on inquiring into a complaint made pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the complaint is held to be true, the concerned body
     shall provide the complainant with a reward in a sum that is half the
     fine imposed on the wrongdoer pursuant to this Chapter.

            (3)   The concerned body may keep confidential a complaint
     made pursuant to sub-section (1).

311. Action to be taken: (1) If any employee, either knowingly or
     negligently or recklessly registers, or causes to be registered, any
     government, public or community property in the name of any
     person or if any employee with the duty to render assistance
     pursuant to this Chapter does not render such assistance, such
     employee shall be liable to departmental action in accordance with
     the law of terms and conditions of his or her service.

            (2)   Nothing shall prevent the taking of action against an
     employee who commits an act referred to in sub-section (1) on a
     criminal offence, in addition to the action taken under sub-section
     (1).

312. Governmental attorney empowered to file or make case,
     petition or appeal: (1) The concerned government attorney shall
     have power to file or make a case, petition or appeal against any



                                   169
     decision made by any body or authority, adversely affecting any
     government or public property.

              (2)   The concerned office or authority shall provide the
     government attorney with such documents and other assistance as
     may be necessary in relation to the filing or making of a case,
     petition or appeal pursuant to sub-section (1).

313. Statute of limitation: A person may make a lawsuit at any time in
     the cases of Sections 305, 306 and 307 of this Chapter, and a person
     who is aggrieved from any act done or action taken referred to in
     other Sections of this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
     months after the date on which such an act was done or action was
     taken.




                                   170
                                  Chapter-6

                         Provisions Relating to Trusts

314. Trust deemed to be established: If a person makes necessary
     arrangements for the operation and management by another of a
     property in which the person has right, ownership and possession
     for the benefit of beneficiary, a trust shall be deemed to be
     established.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     "beneficiary" means a person, group, general public, body whether
     incorporated or unincorporated, or community getting the benefit
     from the trust property.

315. Trust may be public or private: (1) A trust may be either public
     or private.

           (2)      A trust established for the accomplishment of the
     following object shall be deemed to be a public trust:

                   (a)    To establish, operate and use a fund for
                          infrastructures of economic development or other
                          development works,

                   (b)    To establish and operate a fund necessary for the
                          development of skills, creation of employment
                          opportunities and development of the people with
                          low income,

                   (c)    To operate social welfare programs,

                   (d)    To establish and operate such educational and
                          academic institutes like schools, colleges and



                                      171
                  universities as may be useful for the general
                  public,

            (e)   To establish and operate clinics such as hospitals
                  and health posts for public purposes,

            (f)   To protect natural, historical or cultural heritages
                  or to promote such act,

            (g)   To operate programs for the protection of wildlife,
                  aquatic animals or environment,

            (h)   To operate programs for the protection of interest,
                  welfare or upliftment of various classes, groups or
                  communities,

            (i)   To operate programs relating to sports,

            (j)   To carry out service-oriented welfare programs,

            (k)   To operate rescue works,

            (l)   To establish shrines, temples, monasteries, domes,
                  mosques, churches or carry out similar other
                  religious activities,

            (m)   To operate other public programs for the interest
                  of public.

      (3)     A trust which is established with object to render
benefit, advantage or facility to any particular person or group shall
be deemed to be a private trust.

      (4)     If a trust is established to accomplish both public and
private objectives, such a trust shall be deemed to be a public trust.




                               172
316. Application to be made for establishment of trust: (1) A person
     who intends to establish a trust shall make an application, setting
     out the following matters, to the Registrar:

           (a)      Value and details of the property held for the trust,

           (b)      Beneficiary, and benefit and facility to the beneficiary,
                    the terms and limitation thereof,

           (c)      If the trust is to be established for any particular period,
                    matter relating thereto,

           (d)      Other necessary details.

           (2)      In making an application pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the following documents shall also be submitted with the
     application:

           (a)      Memorandum of incorporation of the trust,

           (b)      Trustee's name and photocopy of the deed relating to
                    his or her consent,

           (c)      Photocopy of the deed, if any, executed for the
                    establishment of the trust,

           (d)      Photocopy of a reliable deed relating to the trust
                    settler's identity, and, in the case of the trust settler
                    being a body corporate, certified copies of the
                    documents relating to the incorporation of the body
                    corporate and of the decision by such a body corporate
                    in relation to the establishment of trust,

           (e)      Receipt of payment of the fees chargeable by law for
                    the registration of trust.


                                      173
      Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter:

             (1)   "Registrar" means the authority provided for by
                   law    for    the     registration,   supervision   and
                   liquidation of trusts, and this term also includes
                   the Land Revenue Officer in the concerned
                   district if such authority is not so provided for.

             (2)   "Trustee" means the person who is responsible
                   for the operation and management of a trust
                   property.

      (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if any person has, by way of his or her oral behavior, conduct or a
testamentary gift or will, provided for the operation and
management of a property in which he or she has right, ownership
and possession as a trust, the trust shall be deemed to have been
established by such behavior, conduct or will.

      Provided that in the case of a property requiring registration
for the transfer of its title in accordance with law, a deed pertaining
to such transfer has to be registered.

      (4)    If a foreign person intends to establish a trust, the
person shall make an application, upon fulfilling the procedures as
referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2). A foreign person may be the
founder of the trust to be so established.

      Provided that a foreign person is not allowed to establish a
trust for the accomplishment of the object referred to in clause (l) of
sub-section (2) of Section 315.




                                174
           (5)    At least one-thirds of the trustees of a trust established
     pursuant to sub-section (4) shall be Nepali citizens having
     permanent residence in Nepal.

317. Details to be set out in memorandum of incorporation: The
     following matters shall be set out in the memorandum of
     incorporation of a trust:

           (a)    Names, surnames and addresses of the founders of the
                  trust, and, if a body corporate is the founder, names,
                  surnames and addresses of the directors of such body,

           (b)    Objects and nature of the trust,

           (c)    Names, surnames and addresses of the trustees, details
                  of the business to be performed by them, and, if a body
                  corporate is a trustee, name, surname and address of
                  the person designated by the body to act as the trustee,

           (d)    Details of the beneficiaries,

           (e)    Method of use of the trust property,

           (f)    Details of the tenure of the trustee, if any, so specified,

           (g)    If the beneficiaries are entitled to remuneration or other
                  facilities, details thereof and limitation,

           (h)    If the trust is intended to be established for a certain
                  period, details of such period,

           (i)    In the event of termination of the trust, consequences
                  thereof,

           (j)    Provisions relating to the operation, management and
                  monitoring of the trust property,


                                    175
           (k)    Other necessary matters.

318. Trust to be registered: (1) If an application is made for the
     establishment of a trust pursuant to Section 316, the Registrar shall
     make necessary inquiry into the objects of the trust and the details
     of the property proposed for the establishment of the trust, and, if it
     appears reasonable to register the trust, register the trust and issue
     the trust registration certificate, within a period of thirty-five days
     of the making of such application.

           (2)    If a trust is registered pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     trust is deemed to have been established.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, a private trust may be operated even without registration.

           Provided that if a person so operates a private trust, the
     person shall give information thereof to the concerned Registrar.

319. Power to refuse registration of trust: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained in Section 318, the Registrar may refuse to
     register a trust in any of the following circumstances:

           (a)    If the details, documents or fees referred to in Section
                  316 are not mentioned or paid,

           (b)    If the name of the trust resembles with the name of any
                  other trust already registered prior to the registration of
                  the trust applied for,

           (c)    If the objects or terms of the trust appear to be
                  inappropriate or undesirable for reasons of public
                  interest, decency, courtesy or public order, are not



                                    176
                    lawful or are not capable of being implemented owing
                    to their uncertainty or vagueness.

           (2)      If a trust is not capable of being registered pursuant to
     sub-section (1), the Registrar shall give information thereof, along
     with the reason for refusal, to the applicant within thirty-five days.

           (3)      If, upon receipt of information pursuant to sub-section
     (2), the applicant makes necessary corrections and an application
     again for the registration of the trust, the Registrar shall register the
     trust and issue the registration certificate pursuant to sub-section (1)
     of Section 318, within fifteen days of the making of such an
     application.

320. Transfer of property for incorporation of trust: (1) The trust
     founder shall transfer the property settled for the trust to the trustee
     within a period of three months of the establishment of the trust.

           (2)      If the property to be transferred pursuant to sub-section
     (1) is an immovable property, such a property shall be deemed to
     have been duly transferred only when it is transferred in accordance
     with law.

           (3)      A foreign person that establishes a trust in Nepal shall
     remit into Nepal a movable property equivalent to at least one
     million United States Dollars through regular banking channel and
     hand over the same to the trustee within a period of three months.

           (4)      The information of the hand-over of the movable
     property pursuant to sub-section (3) shall be given to the Registrar.

321. Dissolution of trust on failure of transfer of property: In the
     event of failure to transfer the property within the time-limit


                                     177
     referred to in Section 320, the registration of such a trust shall be
     deemed to be void ipso facto and the trust shall be deemed to have
     been dissolved.

322. Operation and management of trust property according to
     memorandum of incorporation: (1) The trustee shall, subject to
     the terms and restrictions set forth in the memorandum of
     incorporation, operate and manage the trust property.

           (2)    Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
     of incorporation, the trustee shall, in operating and managing the
     property pursuant to sub-section (1), not sell, mortgage, or
     otherwise transfer title to, the immovable property or any part
     thereof without prior permission of the concerned Registrar.

           (3)    In asking for prior permission of the Registrar pursuant
     to sub-section (2), the reason for the sale, mortgage of, or transfer
     of title to, such property, and the reasons and grounds that it may
     result in more benefit to the beneficiary shall be set out.

323. Duty to operate and manage trust property properly: (1) The
     trustee shall operate and manage the trust property properly, by
     exercising his or her capacity and diligence honestly.

           (2)    In the operation and management of the trust property
     pursuant to sub-section (1), the trustee shall make arrangement to
     avoid any loss and damage to, and maintain sustainability of, such
     property.

           (3)    Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
     of incorporation, in the operation and management of the trust
     property pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2), income earned from


                                    178
the trust property which is not required immediately to accomplish
the objects of trust may be invested for the accomplishment of the
objects of trust.

      (4)    Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
of incorporation, in making investment pursuant to sub-section (3),
it may be invested as follows, in the following proportion of the
total sum:

      (a)    At lest twenty-five percent in the purchase of bonds or
             treasury bills issued by the Government of Nepal or
             Nepal Rastra Bank or bonds guaranteed by the
             Government of Nepal,

      (b)    Deposit of a maximum of twenty-five percent in a
             fixed account with a commercial bank,

      (c)    Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed
             account with a development bank,

      (d)    A maximum of five percent in the subscription of
             ordinary shares of a commercial bank,

      (e)    Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed
             account with a finance company,

      (f)    A maximum of five percent in the subscription of such
             ordinary shares of an enlisted public limited company
             as are dealt publicly.

      (5)    The trustee shall, from time to time, carry out
monitoring as to the investment made pursuant to sub-section (4),
and if it appears from such monitoring that the returns of
investment made in one sector be lesser, such investment shall be

                              179
     withdrawn immediately and made in another sector yielding more
     returns, subject to the terms and restrictions of the investment.

           (6)      In making monitoring or investment pursuant to sub-
     section (5), opinion of an expert in the concerned sector may, as
     required, be obtained.

           (7)      An opinion obtained pursuant to sub-section (6) may
     be taken as the basis for monitoring or investment.

           (8)      The trustee shall maintain his or her personal property
     and the trust property separately and operate and mange the trust
     property accordingly, and in the event of a need to operate an
     account, separate accounts shall be maintained.

324. Trustee to be appointed: (1) A trustee shall be appointed for the
     operation, management, protection and care of (herbichar)the trust
     property and for using fruits of such property to the benefit of the
     beneficiary or making proper arrangements thereof.

           (2)      Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
     of incorporation, the founder of the trust shall appoint the trustee.

           (3)      In the event of the failure to appoint or inability to
     appoint the trustee pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the founder of
     trust shall be deemed to be the trustee.

325. Disqualification of trustee: The following person shall not be
     qualified to be a trustee:

              (a)      A person who is not competent to make contract,

              (b)      A person who has embezzled a property in his or
                       her custody,



                                      180
                 (c)      A person who has been convicted by a court of the
                          offense of corruption,

                 (d)      A person who has been sentenced for a criminal
                          offense involving moral turpitude,

                 (e)      A person who is the sole beneficiary of the trust
                          property.

326. Number of Trustees: Except as otherwise provided for in the
      memorandum of incorporation, the number of trustees shall, subject
      to the other provisions of this Chapter, be one in minimum and
      seven in maximum.

327. Body corporate being eligible to be trustee: (1) A body corporate
      which is established in accordance with law may be appointed as a
      trustee.

              (2)      If the body corporate referred to in sub-section (1) is
      appointed as a trustee, the person working as the chief of such a
      body or a person to whom the power is delegated by a decision of
      the board of directors of such a body shall act on behalf of such a
      body.

              Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
      "person working as the chief" means the chairperson, director,
      managing director, general manager, executive director of such
      body or a person empowered by such a body to work as its chief.

328. Provisions relating to vacancy in office of trustee: (1) The office
      of the trustee shall be fallen vacant in any of the following
      circumstances:

                    (a)    If the person is not qualified to be a trustee,

                                        181
            (b)   If the person resigns from the office of a trustee,

            (c)   If the person dies or becomes insolvent,

            (d)   If, in the case of a body corporate, it is dissolved,
                  liquidated or becomes insolvent in accordance
                  with law,

            (e)   If a trust is established for a certain period and
                  such a period is completed,

            (f)   If the trustee is appointed for a certain tenure and
                  such a tenure is completed,

            (g)   If the trustee is removed by the trust founder or
                  court on the ground that he or she has embezzled
                  the trust property or has not taken a reasonable
                  care of (herchaha) such property.

      (2)    If the office of a trustee is fallen vacant pursuant to
sub-section (1), such an office shall be filled in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the memorandum of incorporation.

      (3)    If the office of trustee cannot be fulfilled pursuant to
sub-section (2), the beneficiary, if available, and the concerned
Local Level, if there is no beneficiary or the beneficiary cannot be
identified, shall make an application, accompanied by a list of
possible candidates, to the concerned District Court for the
appointment of a trustee.

      (4)    If an application is made for the appointment of trustee
pursuant to sub-section (3), the District Court shall appoint to the
office of trustee an appropriate person from the list of candidates



                              182
     provided by the applicant, in consonance with the spirit of the
     memorandum of incorporation.

           (5)    If any trustee is relieved of his or her office by virtue
     of the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), he or she shall, as
     promptly as possible, hand over the trust property in his or her
     custody, control or use to other trustees, and he or she shall not get
     immunity from any kind of liability or legal action for any act done
     or action taken by him or her while in office of a trustee by the
     reason only that he or she has been so relieved of office.

           Provided that if all trustees are relieved of office, such
     property shall be transferred after the appointment of another
     trustee.

           (6)    If the office of a trustee of a public trust with only one
     trustee falls vacant or is fulfilled pursuant to this Section,
     information thereof shall be given to the registrar.

329. To specify roll of succession of trustee: (1) Except as otherwise
     provided for in as to the roll of succession of trustees in the
     memorandum of incorporation, after the death of a trustee, his or
     her eldest son, daughter-in-law or daughter shall succeed the office
     of a trustee according to the roll of succession, and if there is no
     one out of them, his or her heir shall succeed the office of trustee.

           (2)    If a person who becomes the trustee pursuant to sub-
     section (1) is not qualified to be the trustee, his or her guardian or
     the person taking care of (herchaha) him or her shall perform the
     obligation of the trustee on his or her behalf until such a person
     becomes qualified.



                                   183
            (3)    Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
      of incorporation, if there is a provision that one's descendents are
      entitled to be the trustee, the descendents of such a person shall
      succeed the office of trustee according to the limit of their
      respective rights, and the provisions contained in Section 326 shall
      not apply to such case.

330. Requirement to perform obligation of trustee in special
      circumstance: If there exists a situation that the office of trustee
      falls vacant in entirety and the office of trustee cannot be filled
      immediately pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 328, the Local
      Level shall function as the trustee until the office is filled.

331. Requirement to operate trust by consensus: (1) Except as
      otherwise provided for in the memorandum of incorporation, the
      trust with more than one trustee shall be operated by consensus
      decision of all the trustees as far as possible.

            (2)    In the event of failure to reach consensus pursuant to
      sub-section (1), the trust may be operated by a majority decision of
      the then existing trustees, and if that is not possible, by the decision
      of the eldest trustee.

332. To carry out object of trust: The trustee shall carry out the object
      of trust as set forth in the memorandum of incorporation, and in so
      carrying out the object, the trustee shall discharge functions
      honestly and according to his or her capacity and diligence.

333. To maintain records of trust property: (1) The trustee shall
      prepare an inventory of the trust property and update the records




                                     184
      thereof, and, in the case of a public trust, a copy of such records
      shall be submitted to the registrar each year.

            (2)     The inventory referred to in sub-section (1) shall also
      reflect the total assets, loans, or if such property has been invested
      in any business, principal, interest or other returns of such
      investment.

334. Protection of trust property: (1) The trustee shall protect and
      maintain the trust property, and may also make any kind of such
      legal action or complete any kind of such formality with any public
      authority as may be required for this purpose.

            (2)     In protecting or maintaining the trust property, the
      trustee shall take proper and reasonable care of (herbichar), and do
      act conducive to the enhancement of, the trustee property as if the
      property were his or her own.

335. Prohibition of possession of trust property to prejudice benefit
      of beneficiary: No trustee shall so possess or use the trust property
      for himself or herself or other person as may be prejudicial to the
      benefit of the beneficiary.

336. Duty to prevent loss to trust property: (1) It shall be the duty of
      the trustee to prevent destruction, termination of, or otherwise loss
      to, the trust in a manner prejudicial to the benefit of the beneficiary
      or contrary to the object of the trust.

            (2)     If the trust property is not managed properly or is made
      subject to cheating or fraud or is embezzled or used for other
      purposes, any trustee or beneficiary may, subject to the provisions




                                     185
      set forth in the memorandum of incorporation, file a complaint in
      the court for the prevention of such embezzlement.

             Provided that any one whosoever may file a complaint in the
      case of a public trust.

             (3)   If, upon a complaint filed pursuant to sub-section (2), it
      is held that the trust property has not been managed properly or has
      been made subject to cheating or fraud or embezzled or used for
      other purposes, the court shall recover the claimed amount from the
      embezzler and may also order compensation to be paid by a trustee
      if the trustee has committed such embezzlement.

337. To maintain accounts of trust: (1) The trustee shall maintain
      accounts in a manner to reflect clearly and actually the accounts of
      the trust property, and provide statements thereof available to the
      registrar, and trust founder or beneficiary, identified, if any, intends
      to inspect the same.

             (2)   In the case of a public trust, the trustee shall have its
      accounts audited by a recognized auditor each year and submit a
      copy of the audit report to the registrar.

338. Breach of trust: (1) If a trustee fails to fulfill the duties required to
      be fulfilled pursuant to this Chapter, the trustee shall be deemed to
      have committed a breach of trust.

             (2)   In the event of a breach of trust pursuant to sub-section
      (1), the trustee so breaching trust shall be responsible for the loss
      and damage caused to the beneficiary and bear liability for the same.

             (3)   In bearing the liability pursuant to sub-section (2), the
      trustee breaching trust shall bear such profits as may be equal to the


                                     186
income or profits which the trust or beneficiary would have made or
earned if the trust had not been breached.

       (4)    If a trust has more than one trustee, all trustees who
commit a breach of trust shall collectively bear the liability for the
loss and damage caused from such breach of trust.

       (5)    If, in relation to one portion of any trust, the trust is
breached, and, in relation to another portion of the trust, benefit is
derived, the trustee shall not use such benefit in the fulfillment of
his or her liability.

       (6)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the trustee shall not bear the liability for the loss and
damage caused from the breach of trust, in the following
circumstance:

       (a)    If the loss and damage is caused by operation of law,

       (b)    If the loss and damage is a result of the breach of trust
              by any act done by the previous trustee or the
              consequence thereof.

       (7)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, any one who does any of the following acts in relation to a
trust in operation upon being incorporated in accordance with law
in force for the time being prior to the commencement of this Act
shall be deemed to have committed a breach of trust:

       (a)     Failing to do acts set forth in the Donative inscription,
              Shilapatra of the trust or deed establishing such trust,

       (b)    Selling, disposing of, gifting, donating or pledging or
              mortgaging the trust property by the trust founder or

                               187
                   his or her offspring or heir, except for the residual
                   property that can be possessed and used after making
                   operation as set forth in the deeds including the
                   Donative inscription, Shilapatra of the trust,

            (c)    Embezzling the movable trust property by the trustee,
                   except for reasonable wear and tear while using it for
                   the trust purpose.

            (7)    One who commits a breach of trust under sub-section
     (7) shall be liable to action in accordance with the law in force at
     the time of the commencement of this Act.

339. Deed of trust property to remain with trustee: (1) Except as
     otherwise provided for in the memorandum of incorporation, the
     deeds, documents of the ownership and possession of the trust
     property and other proofs and evidences pertaining thereto shall all
     be in the custody of the trustee, and in the case of a public trust, the
     trustee shall submit copies of such deeds and documents to the
     registrar.

            Provided that in the case of any deed, document or evidence
     to be approved by the registrar, it is not required to submit the
     copies of such deeds, documents or evidence to the registrar.

            (2)    The trustee and the registrar shall safely retain the
     deeds, documents and evidences referred to in sub-section (1).

340. Entitlement      to    reimbursement       from     trust      property:
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if
     the trustee has used his or her personal property or other's property
     in the course of the protection of the trust property, accomplishment


                                    188
     of the object of trust or protection of the benefit of the beneficiary,
     the trustee shall be entitled to reimburse the amount for such
     property from the trust property.

341. Other powers, duties and liabilities deemed to be vested with
     trustee: Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum of
     incorporation, in addition to the powers, duties and liabilities
     clearly set forth in this Chapter, such other powers and duties as
     may be required for the implementation and accomplishment of the
     object of trust, care (herbichar)and protection of the trust property
     and protection of the rights and benefits of the beneficiary shall be
     deemed to be vested with the trustee.

342. Acts not to be done by trustee: (1) Except as otherwise provided
     for in the memorandum of incorporation, no trustee shall do, or
     cause to be done, any of the following acts:

           (a)    To use the trust property in any manner other than in
                  the accomplishment of the object of trust,

           (b)    To use, or caused to be used, the trust property in any
                  act yielding profit to the trustee himself or herself or to
                  anyone else, except in the accomplishment of the
                  object of trust,

           (c)    To delegate or hand over the responsibility or
                  obligation of trustee to another trustee or a person,

                        Provided that nothing shall bar the appointing of
                  his or her agent or attorney in the course of ordinary
                  transaction or assigning of any responsibility or
                  obligation if such responsibility or obligation is to be


                                     189
                  assigned in view of the nature of such transaction or
                  assigning of any responsibility to another person with
                  the consent of the beneficiary, if any, identified.

           (d)    To carry out any act relating to the trust solely contrary
                  to Section 329, if there are more than one trustee,

           (e)    To obtain any remuneration, allowance or facility in
                  consideration for being a trustee,

                        Provided that nothing shall bar the receiving of
                  reasonable remuneration, allowance or facility for any
                  work done whole-time or part-time after establishing
                  the office or with the prior permission of the registrar,
                  without prejudicing the object of the trust or benefit of
                  the beneficiary.

           (f)    To purchase or otherwise receive on pledge, mortgage,
                  lease or rent the property of the trust for which he or
                  she is a trustee during his or her tenure or before at
                  least three years of his or her retirement from the
                  office of a trustee.

           (2)    The trustee shall not make any economic transaction
     between his or her private property and the trust property. He or she
     shall make compensation for the loss, if any, to the trust property
     from such transaction.

           (3)    The trustee shall not merge his or her property with the
     trust property.

343. To give direction to transfer trust property: Except as otherwise
     provided for in the memorandum of incorporation, in the case of


                                     190
      only one beneficiary, after he or she becomes competent to make
      contract, and in the case of more than one beneficiary, after all of
      them become competent to make contract and reach consensus,
      such beneficiary or beneficiaries may direct the trustee to hand over
      the trust property to him or her or them, and if any direction is so
      given, it shall be the duty of the trustee to abide by such direction.

            Provided that this provision shall not apply to the public trust.

344. Power to relinquish benefit of trust property: (1) In the case of a
      private trust, the beneficiary who is competent to make contract
      may, by a notice in writing to the trustee and the registrar,
      relinquish any or all of his or her right, benefit, facility or interest
      from the trust property.

            (2)      If every beneficiary wholly relinquishes the right,
      benefit, facility or interest from the trust property pursuant to sub-
      section (1), such a trust shall be deemed to have been dissolved.

345. Duty to maintain ownership of trust property: (1) The trust
      property shall be entered as such in the records of trust and held in
      the name of the person specified in the memorandum of
      incorporation and in the name of the beneficiary, if such a person is
      not specified in the memorandum of incorporation.

            (2)      If, in the case of a public trust, the memorandum of
      incorporation provides for the establishment of a separate body
      corporate for the operation and management of the trust property,
      such property shall be held in the name of the body corporate so
      established.




                                     191
346. Alteration in the object of trust: (1) Notwithstanding anything
      contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the trust founder considers
      appropriate to make any amendment or alteration in the object set
      forth in the memorandum of incorporation at the time of the
      creation of trust, he or she may make an application, accompanied
      by the reason for such amendment or alteration, to the registrar.

            (2)    If, on an inquiry into an application made pursuant to
      sub-section (1), the reason for the amendment or alteration in the
      object set forth in the memorandum of incorporation seems to be
      reasonable, the registrar may issue an order to amend or alter such
      object, and, if an order is so made, the object set forth in the
      memorandum of incorporation shall be deemed to have been
      amended or altered accordingly.

347. Trust property not to be counted: Any trust property operated
      and managed by the trustee shall not be counted as the property of
      the trustee for the purpose of assessment of tax or for any other
      purpose.

            Provided that in the case of a person who derives any benefit,
      facility or interest from such property, such benefit, facility or
      interest shall be counted.

348. Consequence of voidance of trust: (1) If a trust once established is
      dissolved or voided for any reason, such dissolution or voidance
      shall not affect any act already done.

            (2)    In the event of dissolution or voidance of a trust for
      any reason pursuant to sub-section (1), in the case of a public trust,
      except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum of its



                                    192
     incorporation, the trustee may, by order of the registrar, hand over
     the trust property to any other trust with the identical object or to
     any public body with similar objects if such other trust is not
     available, and in the case of a private trust, the trustee shall hand
     over the trust property to the beneficiary, if identified, or to the
     nearest successor to the beneficiary if the beneficiary is not
     available or to the trust founder if even such successor is not
     available or to other successor if even the trust founder is not
     available.

           (3)    If any body or person referred to in sub-section (2) is
     not available, the property of the dissolved or voided trust shall
     devolve on the Government of Nepal.

349. Appeal may be made: A party who is not satisfied with any order
     or decision made by the registrar pursuant to this Chapter may
     make an appeal to the concerned District Court within thirty-five
     days after the date of knowledge of such order or decision.

350. Not to affect other trust: (1) Nothing contained in this Chapter
     shall affect any trust in operation upon being incorporated in
     accordance with law in force for the time being prior to the
     commencement of this Act, and such a trust may be operated in
     accordance with the Donative inscription (Danpatra), Shilapatra,
     memorandum of incorporation or other deed establishing such a
     trust or with the ritual, custom or practice.

           Provided that such a trust shall be registered under this Act or
     information of its operation shall be given to the registrar within
     three years of the commencement of this Act, and records thereof
     shall be maintained.

                                    193
      (2)      The trust referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
managed and operated as previously for the object and purpose for
which it was established, and the property or income that remains
upon the accomplishment of that object and purpose may be
possessed, used, pledged or mortgaged.

      (3)      The property of a trust established pursuant to sub-
section (1) may be purchased or sold in a manner without prejudice
the object and purpose of the trust.

      (4)      The purchaser under sub-section (3) shall use the
property for the object and purpose for which the trust was
established.

      (5)      If a trust under sub-section (1) has been established or
operated for any specific purpose by obtaining a government land,
such a land shall be used for the accomplishment of the object and
purpose for which the trust was established, and such a land shall
not be used by the trustor or his or her offspring or successor.

      (6)      If the person referred to in sub-section (5) does not
accomplish the object and purpose of such a trust, the person who
accomplishes such object and purpose shall be entitled to possess
and use such a land.

      (7)      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any person has continuously operated a trust referred to
in sub-section (1) since last sixteen years or more than sixteen years
ago without any deed to that effect, that person may possess and use
such property upon the accomplishment of the object and purpose
of such a trust.



                               194
            (8)    Matters other than those set forth in this Section shall
      be as set forth in the memorandum of incorporation of a trust,
      Sheelapatra, Donative Inscription or as per the custom and practice
      in relation to the operation of such a trust.

351. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation in
      relation to the following matters if a person who is aggrieved from
      any act done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter is to make a
      lawsuit:

            (a)    Embezzlement of the trust property,

            (b)    Fraud or forgery of any document relating to the trust
                   property,

            (c)    Embezzlement or misappropriation of the trust
                   property,

            (d)    Derivation of benefit by the trustee contrary to the
                   terms of the memorandum of incorporation of the trust,

            (e)    Restitution of the trust property or its value or income
                   from the trustee or other person.

            (2)    A lawsuit may be made within six months after the
      date of the accrual of cause of action in relation to any matter other
      than that set forth in sub-section (1).




                                     195
                                Chapter-7

                    Provisions Relating to Usufruct

352. Usufruct deemed to be constituted: (1) When a person gives free
      a property in which he or she has title and ownership and fruits,
      benefit, income or facility to be yielded from that property to
      another person entitling that other person to enjoy such property
      and fruits, benefit, income or facility thereof, usufruct shall be
      deemed to be constituted.

            (2)    The provisions of usufruct shall be as set forth in a
      contract entered into between the concerned persons.

353. Usufruct to be effective: The provision of usufruct constituted by a
      contract shall become effective on the date of the commencement of
      the contract unless otherwise set forth in the contract.

354. Deed to be executed: (1) In giving an immovable property in
      usufruct, its owner shall execute a deed to that effect in accordance
      with law.

            (2)    In giving a property in common in usufruct, consent of
      the coparceners living in a joint family shall be obtained.

355. Entitlement of usufructuary to enjoy property as if it belonged
      to him or her: (1) If a person gives another person his or her
      property in usufruct, the usufructuary of such property shall be
      entitled to enjoy the property, fruits, benefit, income or facility to
      be yielded or earned from the property and fruits, benefit, income or
      facility accrued from the property as if it were his or her own
      property.




                                    196
           (2)      If there are more than one usufructuary obtaining a
     property pursuant to sub-section (1), every usufructuary shall be
     entitled to enjoy that property jointly or severally.

           (3)      If a property obtained under the provision of usufruct is
     partitioned, every coparcener who is entitled to enjoy the property
     in usufruct shall be entitled to enjoy the property pursuant to sub-
     section (1).

           (4)      A usufructuary may make a lawsuit in the court, as
     required, for the protection or enjoyment of the property obtained
     under the provision of usufruct.

356. Property which usufructuary cannot enjoy: Notwithstanding
     anything contained in Section 355, a usufructuary shall not be
     entitled to enjoy the following properties relating to the property
     obtained under the provision of usufruct:

           (a)      Mines and minerals related with the property,

                          Provided that where the mines are the subject of
                    usufruct, the mines may be enjoyed.

           (b)      Grown trees.

                          Provided that fruits, flowers or other products
                    obtained from the trees may be enjoyed.

357. Prohibition of alteration in structure of property without
     consent: A usufructuary shall not be entitled to significantly alter
     the substance or form of the property obtained under the provision
     of usufruct or to destroy such property, except with the owner's
     prior permission.



                                     197
           Provided that if the enjoyment of the property given under
     the provision of usufruct is not possible without an alteration in the
     form of or destruction of the property, except as otherwise provided
     for in the contract, the property may be enjoyed by altering its form
     or destroying it, on payment of the price that may be set at the time
     of returning such property.

358. Power to rent, lease or mortgage property under provision of
     usufruct: (1) The usufructuary may, if he or she so desires, rent,
     lease or mortgage the property obtained under the provision of
     usufruct, by executing a deed, subject to the contract referred to in
     sub-section (2) of Section 352.

           Provided that:

           (1)    It is not required to execute a deed for renting a
                  property for a monthly rent not exceeding twenty
                  thousand rupees.

           (2)    If a property is so rented, leased or mortgaged, the
                  usufructuary shall give information thereof to the
                  owner.

           (3)    The property obtained under the provision of usufruct
                  may not be rented, leased or mortgaged for a period
                  that exceeds the validity period of usufruct.

           (2)    The usufructury shall, in renting, leasing or mortgaging
     the property obtained under the provision of usufruct, mention in
     the relevant deed that the property is under the provision of usufruct.




                                     198
           (3)    If a rent, lease or mortgage of the property obtained
     under the provision of usufruct is executed in contravention of sub-
     sections (1) and (2), such a transaction shall ipso facto be void.

           (4)    A person who obtains a property on rent, lease or
     mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be entitled to enjoy the
     property as if the person were the usufructuary.

359. Duty to maintain (marmat samhar) and care (herbichar)
     property under the provision of usufruct: (1) The usufructuary
     shall maintain (marmat samhar) and take care of (herbichar) the
     property which he or she has obtained under the provision of
     usufruct properly and reasonably as if it were his or her own
     property.

           (2)    If a person obtains a property under the provision of
     usufruct by way of rent, lease or mortgage, the person shall take
     care of such property properly and reasonably.

           (3)    The usufructuary shall maintain the property obtained
     under the provision of usufruct at his or her cost.

           Provided that if it is necessary to maintain such property by
     spending a substantial amount in consequence of a disaster, the
     usufructuary shall obtain the owner's prior permission, and the
     owner shall bear such maintenance expenses.

360. Prohibition of causing damage to property obtained under the
     provision of usufruct: (1) The usufructuary shall not damage, or
     cause to be damaged, the property obtained under the provision of
     usufruct.




                                   199
            (2)    If such a property is damaged in any manner in the
      course of its enjoyment by the usufructuary or by the person who
      has obtained it on rent, lease or mortgage pursuant to Section 358,
      the usufructuary shall be liable for it.

            Provided that the usufructuary shall not be liable for any
      damage or loss caused to such property by a disaster.

            (3)    The usufructuary may make insurance or take other
      necessary preventive measures for the protection of the property
      obtained under the provision of usufruct against possible loss or
      damage in the course of its enjoyment pursuant to sub-section (2).

361. Usufructuary to bear tax or fee: The usufructuary shall pay such
      tax or fee as may be leviable by law in relation to the property
      obtained under the provision of the usufruct.

            Provided that the owner shall bear the wealth tax payable for
      the property obtained under the provision of the usufruct.

362. Information of claim or interference by any one to be given to
      owner: (1) If any one makes encroachment, claim or interference
      on or with the property under the provision of usufruct, the
      usufructuary shall give information thereof to the owner within
      fifteen days of such encroachment, claim or interference.

            (2)    The usufructuary who does not give information
      pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be liable to any consequence
      resulting therefrom.

363. Validity period of the provision of usufruct: (1) The provision of
      usufruct shall remain valid for the period set forth in the contract.




                                     200
           (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the provision of usufruct shall not remain valid beyond the
     following period, except as otherwise provided for in the contract:

           (a)   If the usufructuary is a natural person, the death of the
                 usufructuary or the expiration of a period of forty-nine
                 years since the execution of the provision of usufruct,
                 whichever occurs earlier,

           (b)   If the usufructuary is a legal person, the dissolution of
                 the usufructuary or the expiration of a period of
                 twenty-nine years since the execution of the provision
                 of usufruct, whichever occurs earlier.

                        Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,
                 the term "dissolution" includes the termination,
                 liquidation, revocation of registration or insolvency of
                 a legal person.

           (3)   If there are more than one usufructuary, the property in
     usufruct shall devolve on the owner in proportion to the death or
     dissolution of any usufructuary, except as otherwise provided in the
     contract.

364. Usufruct may be canceled:(1) Notwithstanding anything contained
     in Section 363, if the usufructuary damages or misuses the property
     obtained under the provision of usufruct or does not enjoy it for the
     purpose for which it has been given in usufruct or otherwise does
     any act that prejudices the right of the owner in such property, the
     concerned owner may cancel the provision of usufruct at any time.




                                   201
           (2)    In the event of cancellation of the provision of usufruct
     pursuant to sub-section (1), the usufructuary shall return the
     property obtained under the provision of usufruct.

365. Power to return property by usufructuary: Notwithstanding
     anything contained in Sections 363 and 364, if the usufructuary
     does not wish to enjoy the property obtained under the provision of
     usufruct, the usufructuary may return such a property to the owner
     at any time, by giving a notice of at least forty-five days.

366. Usufruct deemed to be extinguished: (1) The provision of
     usufruct shall be deemed to be extinguished in any of the following
     circumstances:

           (a)    In the event of expiration of the validity period of
                  usufruct pursuant to Section 363,

                  Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the
                  term "expiration of the validity period" means:

                  (1)    If more than one natural person are usufructuary,
                         the usufruct shall be deemed to be terminated on
                         the date on which the last survivor usufructuary
                         dies.

                  (2)    If more than one legal person are usufructuary,
                         the usufruct shall be deemed to be terminated on
                         the date on which the last usufructuary legal
                         person is dissolved.

           (b)    In the event of return of the property on the
                  cancellation of usufruct pursuant to Section 364,




                                    202
           (c)    In the event of return of the property in usufruct by the
                  usufructuary pursuant to Section 365,

           (d)    In the event, except for a reasonable reason, of the
                  failure of the usufructuary to enjoy the property in
                  usufruct until six months after the date on which the
                  provision of usufruct became effective,

           (e)    In the event of the accomplishment of the special
                  purpose for the accomplishment of which the provision
                  of usufruct has been made,

           (f)    In the event that the property obtained under the
                  provision of usufruct is transferred to the usufructuary
                  in accordance with law,

           (g)    In the event of total loss of the property obtained under
                  the provision of usufruct.

           (2)    In the event of the extinguishment of the provision of
     usufruct pursuant to sub-section (1), the property given to any
     person in usufruct shall ipso facto devolve on the owner except in
     the circumstance set forth in clause (f) or (g).

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
     or (2), if a property is given in usufruct on the condition that it shall
     remain valid until any person attains a certain age, the provision of
     usufruct shall remain valid until the date on which the person
     attains that age even if the person dies before the date of attainment
     of such age, as if he or she were surviving.

367. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit


                                    203
within six months after the date of knowledge of the commission of
such an act or action.




                            204
                                Chapter-8

                   Provisions Relating to Servitudes

368. Servitude to be deemed: (1) If there is a provision of enjoyment or
      use by the owner of another property of any immovable property or
      any part thereof in which another person has right, ownership or
      possession pursuant to this Chapter, provision of servitude shall be
      deemed to have been created.

            (2)    A servitude shall be in existence in accordance with the
      contract, nature of the place where the immovable property is
      situated, custom or practice exercised since ancient time therein.

369. Use of provision of servitude to be allowed: (1) If there is a
      provision of servitude pursuant to Section 368, the owner of the
      concerned immovable property shall allow another person to enjoy
      or use the immovable property in accordance with the provision of
      servitude.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if there is a provision of servitude for public purpose, such a
      servitude may also be used for personal purpose.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, a servitude created by operation of law may be used in
      accordance with law.

370. Servitude not to be adversely affected by transfer of immovable
      property: (1) A servitude in a servient immovable property shall
      continue to exist even if the owner of such a immovable property
      transfers all or any of such property to another person in any
      manner.


                                    205
            (2)    Even if the servient immovable property is partitioned,
      each coparcener shall be deemed to have provided such a servitude.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
      or (2), if in transferring or partitioning the servient immovable
      property, there is a provision of servitude elsewhere in such
      property and servitude is not thus required to be provided in the
      immovable property in which a person acquires right by way of
      such transfer or partition, the servitude shall be deemed to have
      been extinguished to that extent.

371. To allow enjoyment or use: (1) If any land, despite that a person
      has right, ownership or possession in it, has been in use since
      ancient time as a public or community road, cattle exit, pasture land,
      ditch, cannel, quay, pond, public road, sewage, track road or main
      road, public shelter, tomb, graveyard, shrine, temple, monastery,
      dome, mosque, Idgaha, Karbala, Kabristan or church, community
      school, hospital or similar other public monument or site, the land
      shall be allowed to be used by the concerned persons accordingly
      for the particular purpose.

            (2)    The owner or possessor of the servient land shall not
      cultivate or use, make any structure in, or otherwise own or possess,
      it in such manner as to adversely affect the provision set forth in
      sub-section (1).

372. Use of neighbor's house or land at time of disaster: If, at the time
      of disaster such as fire, earthquake, volcano and flood, it is not
      possible to rescue victims of such disaster without entering or using
      the house or land of a person, the victims may be rescued, or caused
      to be rescued, by entering the house or land with the consent of the

                                    206
      owner of the house or land if the owner is available, and even
      without consent of the owner of the house or land if the owner is
      not available for the time being or refuses to give consent.

               Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "the
      owner of the house or land" means the person who is using,
      possessing or controlling the concerned house or land for the time
      being.

373. Acquisition of servitude of passage: (1) If the passage originally
      available to have access to and from a house or land is destroyed
      subsequently due to a disaster, the person who has been using the
      passage to and from such house or land from the past shall have the
      servitude of a reasonable passage to the public road.

               (2)   A person shall not be entitled to demand the servitude
      of passage from the owners of all surrounding houses or land
      pursuant to sub-section (1), and he or she may demand such a
      servitude from the owner of the house or land through which the
      distance to the public road is the shortest.

374. Prohibition of transfer of house or land without provision of
      passage or exit:(1) In setting aside and transferring any part of the
      house or land with the provision of passage or exit, such a house or
      land shall not be transferred without making provision of passage or
      exit to both the purchaser and the seller.

               (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if there is another passage or exit to and from such house or land, it
      is not required to make provision of passage or exit.




                                     207
375. Power to extend basic services: If it is not possible to provide
     basic services such as sewerage, water supply, electricity, gas and
     telephone service to the house of a person through his or her own
     land or public, government or community land, the person shall be
     entitled to lay pipe or line in the neighbor's land in such manner as
     not to cause any loss or damage to the owner of such land.

376. Power to use river or stream or river or stream bank: Any
     person may carry out movement, navigation, boating or fishing in
     the river or stream which is situated in, or originated from, the
     personal property of any person or within the zone of a maximum
     of four meters in either side of such river or stream.

           Provided that such activity is not allowed in small rivulets
     that do not have perennial flow of water.

377. Power to use exit road: (1) If a river or stream is diverted or a
     reservoir is built or a dam is made for any reason in the river or
     stream, the owner of the concerned land shall provide a reasonable
     exit for the public and livestock to have access to and from such
     diversion, reservoir or dam.

           (2)    If, in maintaining the provision of exit passage referred
     to in sub-section (1), it is possible to maintain such exit passage
     through the land of more than one person, the exit passage shall,
     unless provided otherwise, be maintained through the nearest land
     that is technically feasible for the access to the diversion, reservoir
     or dam though that passage.




                                    208
378. Prohibition of preventing natural flow of water: (1) Every house
     or land owner shall himself or herself manage the rain water flow
     from his or her house or land.

           (2)    If there is no provision referred to in sub-section (1),
     the rain water shall be allowed to make its natural course.

           Provided that no water shall be let to so flow as to cause
     adverse effect on the downstream land by making a ditch,
     controlling floods or otherwise diverting the flow or through human
     intervention.

379. Power to use stream, river or pond water: Any person may use
     the water of a stream, river or pond, which is originated from, flows
     through or situated in, the land of another person for the purpose of
     irrigation and drinking, after the use of such water by the concerned
     owner.

           Provided that in making such use, the adjoining neighbor
     shall have priority.

380. Requirement to allow passage or exit for farming: (1) If a person
     does not have a passage or exit for people or livestock to have
     access to and from his or her farm land and needs such passage or
     exit, the owner of the concerned land shall provide the facility of
     passage or exit to such a person.

           Provided that no person shall be compelled to provide such a
     passage or exit through the house and compound land.

           (2)    A person who uses the passage or exit pursuant to sub-
     section (1) shall so use it that no loss or damage is caused to the




                                   209
      crops or other property of the person providing such a passage or
      exit.

381. Compensation to be paid: If, in using a house or land belonging to
      another person, any kind of loss or damage is caused to any one for
      the purposes set forth in Sections 372, 373, 375, 377 and 380, the
      person using the passage or exit shall pay a reasonable
      compensation to the concerned house or landowner.

382. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
      done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
      within six months after the date of knowledge of such an act or
      action.




                                  210
                                Chapter-9

                   Provisions Relating to House Rent

383. House deemed to be rented: If a person who has right, possession
      or ownership in a house lends, for a rent, the house to another
      person to use it for a certain period of time, the person shall be
      deemed to rent the house.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      "house" means any house, storey, unit or room of the house, or land
      or cartilage occupied by such a house.

384. Prohibition of renting unsafe house: (1) No person shall rent or
      take on rent a house which is not safe for human habitation from
      health and security perspectives.

            (2)    The quality standards of a house for non-residential
      purpose such as a warehouse, livestock farming, storage and cold
      storage shall be as specified in the house rent agreement.

385. Period of house rent: (1) The period of house rent shall be as set
      forth in the agreement, not exceeding five years.

            Provided that if a house is rented for a commercial purpose, it
      shall be as set forth in the agreement.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      after the expiration of the period of house rent, the period may be
      extended at times with the consent of the house owner and the
      tenant.




                                    211
386. Agreement to be concluded while renting: (1) While renting a
     house, its owner shall enter into an agreement in writing with the
     tenant, setting out the following matters:

                (a)   Full name and address of the owner and of the
                      tenant, their citizenship number, and passport or
                      identification certificate, in the case of a foreigner,

                (b)   Place and plot number of the land where the house
                      is located,

                (c)   Purpose for rent,

                (d)   Date of commencement of rent,

                (e)   Validity period of rent,

                (f)   Monthly rent,

                (g)   Time and mode of payment of rent,

                (h)   Liability to pay tariffs of electricity, water supply,
                      telephone etc. used in the house,

                (i)   Matter on payment of house rent tax,

                (j)   If the rented house is to be insured, matter relating
                      thereto,

                (k)   Matter on leaving the rented house and eviction of
                      the tenant from it,

                (l)   Matter as to whether the rented house can be
                      sublet to another, and

                (m)   Other necessary matters.




                                    212
           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     it is not necessary to enter into an agreement in writing with the
     tenant if the monthly house rent does not exceed twenty thousand
     rupees.

           (3)    The tenant's photograph shall also be affixed to the
     agreement referred to in sub-section (1).

           (4)    The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall also
     be signed by at least two witnesses of each side, namely the house
     owner and the tenant, and a copy thereof shall be retained each by
     the owner and the tenant.

           (5)    After the completion of the procedures referred to in
     sub-section (4), an agreement shall be deemed to be entered into
     between the house owner and the tenant.

387. Details of house to be provided: In renting a house, the owner
     shall, at the time of entering into agreement, disclose the weakness
     or fault, if any, in the structure of the house to the tenant.

388. Preparation of description of goods or chattels: (1) The house-
     owner shall, prior to renting his or her house, prepare a description
     of the goods or chattels in the house to be rented.

           (2)    If the tenant is to use the goods or chattels set forth in
     the description prepared pursuant to sub-section (1), he or she shall
     receive such goods or chattels and give a receipt thereof to the
     house-owner.

389. Obligations of house owner: The obligations of the house-owner
     shall be as follows:




                                    213
           (a)   To allow the tenant to use the house in accordance with
                 the agreement,

           (b)   To arrange for such water and electricity supply,
                 sewerage and sanitation in the rented house as may be
                 required, except as otherwise provided for in the
                 agreement,

           (c)   To prevent the tenant from insecurity, harassment or
                 unrest from other persons dwelling in the house,

           (d)   To abide by the other matters set forth in the agreement.

390. Obligations of tenant: The obligations of the tenant shall be as
     follows:

           (a)   To pay the rent to the house owner within the specified
                 period,

           (b)   To maintain sanitation in, take care of (herchaha),
                 protect and safeguard the rented house properly and
                 reasonably, as if it were his or her own,

           (c)   Not to do any act such as causing unrest, harassment or
                 insecurity to the other dwellers in the house or
                 neighbors,

           (d)   To abide by the other matters set forth in the agreement.

391. Mode and procedure of payment of rent: (1) The tenant shall pay
     the rent to the house owner in accordance with the mode and
     procedure set forth in the agreement.

           (2)   If the agreement does not provide for any mode and
     procedure of the payment of rent pursuant to sub-section (1), the


                                  214
     tenant shall pay the rent to the house owner within seven days of
     the expiry of each month.

           (3)    The rent may be paid by way of cheque or cash
     pursuant to sub-section (2).

           (4)    If the owner receives the rent in cash pursuant to this
     Section, he or she shall give a receipt thereof to the tenant.

392. Obligation to pay tax and other charge: (1) Except as otherwise
     set forth in the agreement, it shall be the obligation of the house
     owner to pay the tax and other charge leviable by law in relation to
     the house rented.

           (2)    If it is the obligation of the land owner to pay tax or
     charge pursuant to sub-section (1) and the house owner fails to pay
     the tax or charge in time, the tenant may pay such tax or charge.

           (3)    If the tenant pays the tax or charge pursuant to sub-
     section (2), he or she shall be entitled to deduct such an amount
     from the rent payable to the house owner.

393. Insurance of house to be procured: (1) A tenant who rents a
     house for industrial or business purpose shall procure the insurance
     of the house for its security.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
     "industrial or business purpose" means the operation of any
     industry or carrying on a business or trade by having a departmental
     store or one or more than one shop.

           (2)    If the person obliged to procure insurance pursuant to
     sub-section (1) fails to procure insurance of the house and the house



                                      215
     is damaged by such cause as disaster, unrest, riot or fire, the tenant
     shall be liable for such damage.

394. Repair and maintenance of house rented:(1) Except as otherwise
     set forth in the agreement, the tenant shall be obliged to repair and
     maintain the rented house, as required.

           (2)   If the agreement provides that the house owner is
     obliged to repair and maintain the rented house and it is necessary
     to carry out any repair and maintenance of the house, the tenant
     shall give a notice in writing to the house owner in time.

           (3)    If the land-owner fails to repair and maintain the rented
     house despite the notice given pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     tenant may repair and maintain such a house.

           (4)   The tenant shall be entitled to deduct the billed amount
     of expenses incurred in the repair and maintenance of the house
     carried out pursuant to sub-section (3) from the rent payable to the
     house owner.

           (5)   Except as otherwise agreed upon between the house
     owner and the tenant in respect of the repair and maintenance of the
     house, the tenant shall, prior to carrying out repair and maintenance
     under sub-section (4), prepare a cost estimate of the repair and
     maintenance and give its written information to the house owner in
     advance of fifteen days.

395. Subletting house rented to other person: (1) If the agreement
     entered into with the house owner provides that the tenant may
     sublet the whole or any portion of the house rented by him or her to




                                   216
     another person, the tenant may, subject to the agreement, sublet the
     whole or any portion of such a house to another person.

           (2)     If the tenant sublets the whole or any portion of the
     house rented to another person pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     tenant shall, no later than fifteen days, give information in writing
     indicating the name and address of the sub-tenant to the house-
     owner.

           (3)     A sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to sub-
     section (1) shall pay the rent of the house or its portion to the tenant
     who has so sublet.

           (4)     The sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to sub-
     section (1) shall, while dwelling in the rented house, abide by all
     such terms and provisions as required to be abided by the tenant
     pursuant to this Chapter.

           (5)     If the sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to sub-
     section (1) fails to act in accordance with the terms while dwelling
     in the rented house or fails to maintain sanitation in, protect or
     safeguard, the house or carries out any act such as causing
     harassment, pain or unrest to the other dwellers of the house or
     neighbors, the tenant may evict the sub-tenant from the house at
     any time.

396. Prohibition of altering structure without consent: (1) Except        as
     otherwise provided in the agreement, the tenant shall not demolish,
     remove or disorder any structure of, or add any structure to, the
     rented house or otherwise alter it without the house owner's consent
     in writing.



                                    217
             (2)    If the tenant does any act in contravention of sub-
       section (1) and thereby causes any loss to the house-owner, the
       house-owner shall be entitled to recover compensation for the loss
       caused to him or her from the tenant.

397.   Prohibition of using house contrary to agreement: The tenant
       shall not use the house for any purpose other than that for which he
       or she has rented it, without prior consent of the house-owner.

398. Alteration in agreement: The house owner and the tenant may,
       with mutual consent, make necessary alteration in the house rent
       agreement.

             Provided that if such an agreement is registered pursuant to
       this Act, alteration shall be made upon making application to the
       concerned body.

399. Power to inspect: (1) The house-owner may, by an advance notice
       to the tenant, inspect the rented house from time to time.

             (2)    If the house-owner intends to inspect the rented house
       pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the tenant to
       allow the house-owner to inspect the house.

400. Leaving rented house: (1) A tenant may leave the rented house
       prior to the expiration of the period of rent in any of the following
       circumstances:

             (a)    If the house owner fails to perform his or her
                    obligations pursuant to Section 389,

             (b)    If the tenant no longer needs the house for the purpose
                    for which he or she rented it,



                                     218
           (c)   If the house owner does any act in contravention of the
                 agreement or this Chapter.

           (2)   If the tenant is to leave the house in the circumstance
     referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), except as otherwise
     provided in the agreement, the tenant shall give a notice in writing
     to the house-owner in advance of at least thirty-five days.

           (3)   If the tenant leaves the house without giving a notice
     pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner shall be entitled to
     deduct the rent for that period from the rent, if any, paid in advance
     by the tenant and to recover the same from the tenant, failing such
     advance payment.

401. Power to evict tenant: (1) The house-owner may evict the tenant
     from the house in any of the following circumstances:

           (a)   If the tenant fails to perform his or her obligations
                 pursuant to Section 390,

           (b)   If the tenant commits in the rented house any offense
                 related activity prohibited by law,

           (c)   If the house-owner needs the house for himself or
                 herself,

           (d)   If it is necessary to repair and maintain the house by
                 removing inhabitants from the house,

           (e)   If the rented house does not appear to be appropriate
                 for human habitation from the technical and health
                 perspectives,

           (f)   If the period of house rent expires,



                                   219
           (g)    If the tenant does any act in contravention of the
                  agreement or this Chapter,

           (h)    If there exists the circumstance under sub-section (5)
                  of Section 395.

           (2)    If it is necessary to evict the tenant from the house in
     the circumstance referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1), the
     land-owner shall give a notice in writing to the tenant in advance of
     at least thirty-five days.

           (3)    If the house owner evicts the tenant from the house
     pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner is not entitled to rent
     such a house to another person until three months, without using it
     on his or her own.

           (4)    If the house-owner is to rent such house to another
     person within three months pursuant to sub-section (3) and the
     previous tenant intends to rent such a house, he or she shall get
     priority.

402. House rent agreement deemed to be terminated: A house rent
     agreement entered into pursuant to Section 386 shall be deemed to
     have been terminated in any of the following circumstances:

           (a)    If the tenant leaves the house,

           (b)    If the house-owner evicts the tenant from the house,

           (c)    If the house-owner and the tenant cancel the agreement
                  with mutual consent,

           (d)    If the period of house rent expires.




                                    220
403. Duty to hand over goods or chattels in good condition: (1) The
     tenant shall, while leaving the rented house, count the goods or
     chattels in his or her custody, clean or color the house, if required,
     and hand over the same in good condition to the house-owner.

           (2)    If the tenant looses or damages any goods or chattel in
     his or her custody, the tenant shall hand over similar goods or
     chattel or pay a sum of money as per the prevailing price of such
     goods or chattel to the house-owner.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
     the tenant shall not be bound to reimburse for any goods or chattel
     which is depreciable or destroyable in the course of daily use or to
     pay price for such goods or chattel.

404. Power to vacate house: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
     elsewhere in this Chapter, if a tenant disappears without paying the
     rent for three months or more without notice and the tenant is not
     found despite a public notice or correspondence with his or her
     address or the tenant or his or her successor or agent does not
     appear despite that he or she has been found, the house-owner shall
     submit an application with such statement to the concerned ward
     office of the Local Level.

           (2)    If an application is submitted pursuant to sub-section
     (1), the concerned ward office shall make a public notice inviting
     the tenant to appear within a period of fifteen days.

           (3)    If a notice is published pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     tenant shall appear within such a period.




                                   221
           (4)   If such a person does not appear within the period
     referred to in sub-section (3), the concerned ward office may open
     and vacate the rented house, upon having the goods therein in its or
     any one's custody.

           (5)   If the person who has disappeared pursuant to sub-
     section (3) returns or sends his or her agent within six months, the
     concerned ward office shall collect the due rent from, and return the
     goods to him or her.

           (6)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if the concerned ward office of the Local Level does not
     take any action even within one month of the application submitted
     to it, the concerned house-owner shall submit an application to the
     concerned ward office and the nearby police office, and execute a
     deed and open the house in witness of a police employee and at
     least two local persons, and hand over the custody of the tenant's
     goods to the police.

405. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
     within six months after the date on which such an act was done or
     action was taken.




                                  222
                                 Chapter-10

                  Provisions Relating to Donation and Gift

406. Donation or gift deemed to be effected: (1) If a person grants free
      of cost a property in which the person has right and ownership to
      another person or for any religious, social, public or community
      purpose such an act shall be deemed to be a donation.

            (2)      If a person grants free of cost a property in which the
      person has right and ownership to another person as a reward, prize
      or tip in consideration for merits to him or her by that other person
      by way of fostering him or her or otherwise or for family love or
      affection such an act shall be deemed to be a gift.

            (3)      In effecting a donation or gift pursuant to sub-section
      (1) or (2), such a donation or gift may be so effected that it is
      effective immediately or after a certain period or after the death of
      its maker.

            (4)      If a donation or a gift becomes effective only after the
      death of the maker of such donation or gift, it shall be deemed that
      he or she has executed a testamentary donation or testamentary gift.

407. Property may be donated by pronouncement: A person may
      donate a certain amount or property for any specific purpose by
      making pronouncement in writing or publicly in a public function
      organized for that purpose.

            Provided that no lawsuit may be made if the person does not
      transfer the property so donated by him or her.




                                     223
408. Voidance of donation or gift: Any donation or gift made pursuant
     to this Chapter shall ipso facto be void in any of the following
     circumstances:

           (a)    If the person entitling to donation or gift does not
                 accept the donated or gifted property himself or herself
                 or through his or her agent,

           (b)   If a property is donated or gifted to a person with
                 entitlement after testament and the receiver of donation
                 or gift dies before the person making such a donation
                 or gift or the organization obtaining donation or gift is
                 dissolved,

           (c)   If a property is donated or gifted to an unborn baby and
                 the baby is not born alive,

           (d)   If the donated or gifted property is so destroyed that its
                 existence is extinct before the donation or gift becomes
                 effective.

409. Donation or gift to be voidable:(1) Notwithstanding anything
     contained elsewhere in this Act, a donation or gift may be voided in
     any of the following circumstances:

           (a)   If a person donates or gifts a property in which another
                 has right and ownership,

           (b)   If any property is donated or gifted without obtaining
                 the consent of another person where such consent is
                 needed pursuant to law,

           (c)   If the maker of the donation or gift is an incompetent
                 or quasi-competent person,

                                  224
           (d)    If the donation or gift is made without fulfilling the
                  legal requirements.

           (2)    In the case of a donation or gift made without the
     consent of another person pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1)
     where such consent is required, the property shall be void to the
     extent of such consent not taken.

410. Power to amend or revoke deed of gift with testament: (1) The
     maker of gift with testament may, if he or she so wishes, amend the
     terms of, or revoke, the deed of gift with testament executed by him
     or her at any time, by making an application in person before the
     concerned authority.

           (2)    In amending or revoking the deed of gift with
     testament pursuant to sub-section (1), such a person shall appear
     before the concerned authority, execute a separate deed and then
     amend or revoke such a deed of gift with testament.

           (3)    The deed revoking or amending the deed of gift with
     testament pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be executed in
     fulfillment of the procedures applicable to the execution of the deed
     of gift with testament.

           (4)    No person may grant a property once granted to any
     one by executing the deed of gift with testament to other person by
     executing such a deed, without revoking the earlier deed of gift
     with testament pursuant to this Section.

           (5)    If a deed of gift with testament is executed in
     contravention of sub-section (4), the deed of gift with testament
     executed earlier shall ipso facto be valid.


                                   225
411. Not to obtain property under deed of gift with testament: If the
      receiver of gift with testament is convicted to have committed any
      criminal offense against the maker of such a gift before the deed of
      gift with testament becomes effective, the receiver shall not be
      entitled to obtain the property under such a deed.

412. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of
      limitation, if any, specified separately in this Chapter, within two
      years after the date of maturation of one's right in donation or gift
      received by one and after the date of possession and enjoyment
      upon maturity of right in a donation or gift incapable of being made,
      and, in relation to the other cases, within one year after the date of
      knowledge of any act done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter,
      by a person who is aggrieved from such an act or action.




                                    226
                                 Chapter-11

    Provisions Relating to Transfer and Acquisition of Property

413. Property deemed to be transferred: If a person sells, donates,
     gifts or otherwise transfers a property in which he or she has right
     and ownership to another person, the property shall be deemed to
     have been transferred to that other person.

414. Property may be transferred: (1) Any person, other than a person
     who is not competent to make contract pursuant to this Act or laws
     in force, may, subject to this Act, transfer a property in which he or
     she has right and ownership to one or more than one person jointly
     or severally.

           (2)       The competency or incompetency referred to in sub-
     section (1) shall be determined on the basis of whether he or she
     was competent or incompetent at the time of the transfer of property
     by him or her.

           (3)       A person may, pursuant to sub-section (1), transfer a
     property in which he or she has right and ownership to another
     person with immediate or testamentary effect.

           (4)       In transferring a property pursuant to this Section, a
     deed shall be executed in fulfillment of the legal requirements.

           Provided that:

           (1)       It is not required to execute a deed to donate or gift any
                     movable property or cash amounting up to one hundred
                     thousand rupees.




                                        227
           (2)    Sale or otherwise transfer of a movable property shall
                  be made in accordance with the laws in force.

415. Power of guardian or curator to sell property: (1) A guardian or
     curator may, subject to this Act, sell and transfer a property for the
     rights, interests and protection of the person under his or her
     guardianship or curatorship.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     except as otherwise provided in this Act, no immovable property
     may be sold without permission of the court.

416. Ownership devolving on transferee of property: (1) If any
     person transfers his or her property to another person pursuant to
     Section 414, his or her ownership in that property shall cease to
     exist from the date of such transfer and the transferee shall have
     ownership in such property.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a person transfers the right in his or her property to be effective
     with testament, the transferee shall have ownership in such property
     only after the death of the transferor.

           (3)    If two or more persons acquire the same property, they
     shall have that much entitlement to such property in proportion to
     their respective portion.

           (4)    If a deed does not indicate the portion to which a
     person is entitled on the acquisition of a property, all the persons
     acquiring the property shall be deemed to have acquired it equally.

417. Power to transfer private property: A person may transfer his or
     her private property to another person without any one's consent.


                                    228
418. Joint property may be sold by way of sale: (1) A joint property
     may be sold and transferred with the consent of all of its owners.

           (2)    Even though all the owners do not agree to transfer the
     joint property pursuant to sub-section (1), any owner may transfer
     the property of his or her right or portion.

           (3)    If, in making a transfer pursuant to sub-section (1), it is
     technically not possible to separate the right or portion of any
     owner from the joint property, and another owner intends to acquire
     such property, that other owner shall be entitled to obtain it at the
     price mutually agreed upon between the owners.

           (4)    If more than one owner intend to acquire the joint
     property, the owner who agrees to pay the highest price shall be
     entitled to obtain such property.

           (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
     if the other owners do not intend to acquire the right or portion of
     any owner and it is not possible technically to separate such
     property and, the whole of the joint property shall be sold and the
     proceeds of sale shall be divided between the owners according to
     their respective right or portion in that property.

           (6)    If   any   person   transfers     the    joint   property   in
     contravention of sub-section (1), only the transfer of the extent of
     his or her right or portion in such property shall be valid, and the
     concerned person shall be entitled to get return of the property
     transferred in excess of the right or portion of the transferor.

419. Prohibition of transferring property in common without
     obtaining consent: (1) No person shall, without obtaining written


                                    229
     consent of the coparceners in common, transfer a property in
     common to another person.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a coparcener of the joint family is a witness to the deed of
     transfer of a property in common, consent of that coparcener shall
     be deemed to have been obtained.

           (3)    If any person transfers a property in common in
     contravention of sub-section (1), the transfer of title only to the
     extent of such right or portion that person has in that property shall
     be valid. The concerned coparcener shall be entitled to get back the
     property transferred in excess of such right or portion.

420. Property in common may be sold for household purpose:
     Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 419, the person
     acting as the head of family may, for the household purpose, sell
     whole of the property in common, in the case of a movable property,
     and the half of such property, in the case of an immovable property,
     without consent of the others.

421. Prohibition of transferring other's property: (1) No person shall
     transfer a property to another person in which any one else has right
     and ownership.

           (2)    If any person transfers a property in contravention of
     sub-section (1), such a deed or transaction shall be void.

           (3)    If the real owner makes a claim in the property
     transferred pursuant to sub-section (1), the transferee of such
     property shall return it to the concerned owner.




                                   230
              (4)   If a person finds any lost or stolen property, the owner
     of such property may claim it, along with evidence showing his or
     her ownership, within three years after the date on which the
     property was lost or stolen.

              (5)   If any person claims such property pursuant to sub-
     section (4), the finder of that property shall return it to the owner,
     by collecting the amount of expenses, if any, incurred in its
     preservation or maintenance.

              (6)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
     if a person has acquired any stolen or lost property by way of
     purchase at a public market or auction or bidding made publicly by
     any person or body, the person shall not be bound to return such
     property to the real owner unless and until he or she obtains the real
     value of such property and the fees or amount, if any, paid by him
     or her in the acquisition of such property.

422. Prohibition of transferring property in duplication: (1) No
     person shall re-transfer to another person a property which he or she
     has already transferred to some other person.

              (2)   If any person transfers a property in contravention of
     sub-section (1), the deed of transfer registered at an earlier date
     shall get legal validity if the transfer of an immovable property has
     been made, and if the transfer of a movable property has been made,
     the transfer to the person who acquires the property earlier shall be
     valid.

423. Donation or gift incapable of being effected by guardian or
     curator: No guardian or curator may donate or gift any property



                                    231
     belonging to the person under his or her guardianship or curatorship
     to any person.

424. Entitlement to amount or compensation in event of deprivation
     of enjoyment of property: (1) If a person transfers a property by
     way of sale pursuant to this Chapter and the purchaser is deprived
     of enjoying the property wholly or partly because of such transfer
     being invalid for any reason, the purchaser shall be entitled to
     recover from the transferor the amount paid by him or her for the
     property to the extent that he or she is so deprived of enjoying, an
     interest to be set by yearly ten percent of the amount and the
     registration fee or other amount, if any, he or she has paid for the
     transfer of that property as if it were an unsecured bond (Kapali).

           (2)      If any person makes any structure in a property
     purchased pursuant to this Chapter and is not able to enjoy that
     property because of such transfer being invalid for any reason, that
     person may demolish and take away the structure made by him or
     her within six months.

           (3)      If any person is aggrieved from the transfer of a
     property in contravention of Sections 419, 421 and 422 or the
     failure to demolish and take away any structure pursuant to sub-
     section (2), such a person shall also be entitled to a reasonable
     compensation for actual loss and damage suffered by him or her
     from such transferor, in addition to the amount referred to in sub-
     section (1).

           (4)      If a person who may be entitled to a donation or who is
     entitled to a donation or gift is aggrieved from being unable to use
     the property for any reason under this Chapter, the person shall be

                                    232
     entitled to get a reasonable compensation from the person making
     donation or gift, subject to the other Sections of this Chapter.

           Provided that compensation cannot be recovered in the case
     of a testamentary gift being void.

           (5)         Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, a person who obtains a property in any of the following
     circumstances shall not be entitled to recover the amount referred to
     in sub-sections (1), (3) and (4):

                 (a)      If he or she has obtained the property knowingly
                          that it was other’s property or a stolen property,

                 (b)      If he or she has obtained the property knowingly
                          that it was already transferred to another person.

 425. Right in property may be transferred by attorney: (1) If a
     person appoints another person, who is competent to be an attorney
     in accordance with law, as his or her authorized attorney indicating
     the reason that he or she is not able to appear in person before the
     concerned office in order to sell and transfer his or her immovable
     property, such an authorized attorney may, on his or her behalf, sell
     and transfer his or her property to another person.

           (2)         A person may sell his or her movable property through
     his or her attorney or agent.

426. Procedure to be followed by body corporate while purchasing
     or transferring property: (1) If, in transferring an immovable
     property held in the name of a body corporate established in
     accordance with law, the board of directors of such a body gives
     power by a decision to any member of the board of directors or


                                        233
     employee of such a body to transfer the property, such a person
     may transfer the property on behalf of such a body.

           (2)    If the procedure referred to in sub-section (1) is
     fulfilled while purchasing or otherwise obtaining an immovable
     property in the name of a corporate body, the property may be
     purchased or obtained in the name of such a body.

427. Property may be purchased or obtained by other person on
     one’s behalf: If, except the circumstance set forth in Section 426, a
     person who purchases or obtains a property in accordance with this
     Chapter is, for any reason, unable to appear in person before the
     concerned office and gives a power of attorney, accompanied by his
     or her citizenship certificate, to a person who is competent to be an
     attorney by law in relation to the purchase or obtainment of the
     property, such an attorney may purchase or obtain the property in
     the name of that person.

428. Property may be purchased or obtained in the name of
     incompetent or quasi-competent person: A guardian or curator
     may acquire any property by way of donation, gift, purchase or
     otherwise for incompetent, quasi competent minor or a guardian or
     member of undivided family for the baby in the womb under his or
     her guardianship or curatorship.

429. Registration and deregistration of property right in which is
     transferred in testament: (1) If a person transfers his or her right
     in a property to another person with testamentary effect and such
     transferor of property dies, one who obtains the property shall
     submit an application, accompanied by the death registration
     certificate as well as other evidences, to the concerned office for the

                                   234
     transmission of the property to him or her, within six months after
     the date of the transferor’s death.

              (2)   If an application is submitted pursuant to sub-section
     (1), the concerned office shall examine the deed maintained in it
     and make necessary inquiry as to whether the deed executor has
     died or not and the deed is void or not.

              (3)   If, upon an inquiry made pursuant to sub-section (2), it
     appears that the transferor of the property has died and has not got
     the deed voided, such property shall be transmitted to the applicant.

              (4)   If any person submits an application to the office for
     the transmission after the expiration of the time-limit referred to in
     sub-section (1), the office shall transmit such property to the
     applicant in accordance with such a deed, by collecting the fees by
     five hundred rupees for each year after the expiration of the time-
     limit.

430. Not to claim for damage, destroy or low quality: A person who
     has once purchased a property from another person shall not be
     entitled to make a claim that such property is damaged, destroyed
     or of low quality.

              Provided that if the seller has sold the property by
     misrepresentation or with deviation from the particulars set forth in
     the deed, the purchaser shall be entitled to compensation for the
     same.

431. Property may be exchanged: (1) Any person may exchange his or
     her property with another person with or without adding any
     amount.


                                    235
           (2)    A deed shall be executed in accordance with law in
     exchanging a property pursuant to this Act.

432. Restriction on transfer of immovable property to foreigner: (1)
     No person shall, without obtaining prior permission of the
     Government of Nepal, transfer any immovable property to a
     foreigner but for the person who has acquired the non-resident
     citizenship of Nepal, it will be according to prevailing law.

           (2)    If any person transfers any immovable property to a
     foreigner in contravention of sub-section (1), the relevant deed shall
     ipso facto be void, and such property shall devolve on the
     Government of Nepal.

           (3)    The amount invested by the creditor in the obtainment
     of an immovable property pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
     equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali).

433. Foreigner to transfer partition share or inheritance, if any
     obtained: (1) If any foreigner obtains a partition share in or
     succeeds to any immovable property in Nepal, the property shall
     not be eligible to be transferred to or registered in his or her name
     nor shall he or she be entitled to enjoy the income of that property,
     except where so permitted by the Government of Nepal.

           Provided that this provision shall not apply to a person who
     has obtained non-resident Nepali citizenship.

           (2)    Any foreigner who obtains any partition share or
     succession pursuant to sub-section (1) shall transfer such property
     to a citizen of Nepal in any manner, and the concerned office shall,




                                   236
      for that purpose, issue a provisional landownership registration
      certificate valid for the day of transfer of right.

            (3)    If the foreigner fails to transfer a partition share or
      succession obtained in his or her name pursuant to sub-section (1)
      to a citizen of Nepal pursuant to sub-section (2) at any time, in the
      case of the partition share, and within three years of its obtainment,
      in the case of succession, the Government of Nepal shall have right
      in such property after the expiration of that time-limit.

434. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of
      limitation, if any, specified separately in this Chapter, at any time in
      the case of Section 432, and, in relation to the other cases, within
      six months after the date of knowledge of any act done or action
      taken pursuant to this Chapter, by a person who is aggrieved from
      such act or an action.




                                      237
                              Chapter-12

      Provisions Relating to Mortgage of Immovable Property

435. Property deemed to be mortgaged: (1) If a debtor gives the whole
     or any portion of an immovable property in which the debtor has
     right, ownership or possession to a creditor in consideration for a
     loan which the debtor borrows from the creditor, entitling the
     creditor to possess that property with effect from the date of
     execution of the deed or after a certain period, such property shall
     be deemed to have been given in mortgage.

           (2)    If the deed provides that the creditor is entitled to
     possess the property mortgaged pursuant to sub-section (1) with
     immediate effect at the time of lending or after a certain period,
     such a mortgage shall be deemed to be a mortgage with possession
     (Bhogbandaki), and if the deed provides that the creditor is entitled
     to possess the property in the event of the debtor’s default on
     repayment of the loan within the deadline set by the creditor and the
     debtor for repayment, such a mortgage shall be deemed to be a
     mortgage without possession (Drishtibandhaki).

           (3)    A property to be mortgaged shall be of such nature as
     may be capable of being enjoyed by the mortgagee.

           (4)    A person shall not mortgage a property in which he or
     she has not right, ownership or possession or which he or she will
     acquire in the future.

436. Deed to be executed: (1) A deed shall be executed in accordance
     with law for mortgaging any property pursuant to this Chapter.




                                  238
           (2)   A person executing the deed of mortgage shall be
     competent in accordance with law.

437. Mortgaged property to be possessed and enjoyed: (1) The
     creditor shall possess and enjoy the property in mortgage with
     possession from the date of execution of the deed thereon or from a
     particular date, if any, specified in the deed, and the property in
     mortgage without possession within two years of the expiration of
     the date for repayment of loan by the debtor.

           (2)   If, for any reason, the creditor is not able to possess
     and enjoy such property within the period referred to in sub-section
     (1) or if the debtor does not allow, by any means, the creditor to
     possess and enjoy it, the creditor may make a lawsuit in accordance
     with law for effecting the possession and enjoyment of such
     property.

           (3)   If the creditor fails to possess and enjoy the property
     pursuant to sub-section (1) or to make a lawsuit for effecting its
     possession and enjoyment pursuant to sub-section (2), such a
     mortgage shall ipso facto be inoperative.

           (4)   If the deed of a mortgage becomes inoperative pursuant
     to sub-section (3), the deed shall be equivalent to an unsecured
     bond (Kapali).

438. Possessory right in mortgaged property to be deemed
     transferred: If any person mortgages any property, the possessory
     right in such property shall be deemed to have been transferred to
     the creditor from the date of its possession and enjoyment by the
     creditor.



                                  239
439. Entitlement to possess as if it belonged to oneself: (1) The
     creditor shall be entitled to possess and enjoy the property
     mortgaged to him or her and fruit, benefit and facility brought out
     from such property as if the same were his or her own property.

           (2)    If the creditor is not able to possess and enjoy the
     property mortgaged to him or her because of its incapability of
     being transferred or of any hindrance or obstruction by the debtor,
     the debtor shall pay a reasonable compensation to the creditor for
     the same.

440. Duty to take reasonable care of (herbichar)              mortgaged
     property: (1) After acquiring possessory right in the mortgaged
     property, the creditor shall take a reasonable care and protection of
     that property as if it were his or her own.

           (2)    The creditor himself or herself shall pay the tax or
     charge, if any, payable by law for the possession and enjoyment of
     the mortgaged property.

           Provided that the debtor shall pay the land revenue payable
     by law.

           (3)    If the creditor is not able to possess and enjoy the
     mortgaged property because of any hindrance or obstruction by any
     person other than the debtor, the creditor may make a lawsuit in
     accordance with law for its possession and enjoyment.

441. Interest, charge or fee not to be collected: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Act, no creditor who has lent
     money against the security of mortgage with possession in a




                                   240
     property shall collect any kind of interest, charge or fee in
     consideration of such loan from the debtor.

              (2)   After the creditor has acquired possession in the
     property of mortgage without possession, the creditor shall not
     collect any kind of interest, charge or fee in consideration for such
     loan.

442. Period for possession and enjoyment of property in mortgage
     with possession: (1) Except as otherwise provided in the deed of
     mortgage, no property in mortgage with possession may be
     possessed and enjoyed for a period exceeding ten years.

              (2)   If the property in mortgage with possession is not
     redeemed within the period referred to in sub-section (1), the deed
     of mortgage shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond.

443. Maximum period of mortgage without possession: (1) No period
     of a mortgage without possession in a property shall exceed five
     years.

              (2)   No creditor is entitled to take action for effecting
     possession in the property in mortgage without possession or
     having recovery of the related loan from the debtor prior to the
     completion of the period referred to in sub-section (1).

              (3)   After the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section
     (1), the property may be possessed for a period not exceeding ten
     years.

              (4)   If the property given in mortgage without possession is
     not redeemed within the period of ten years after the possession




                                     241
     pursuant to sub-section (3), the relevant deed shall be equivalent to
     an unsecured bond.

444. Redemption of mortgaged property at any time: The debtor may,
     at any time, redeem his or her property from the creditor by
     repaying the loan, in the case of a property given in mortgage with
     possession, and also the interest, if any, payable on the loan, in the
     case of a property given in mortgage without possession, to the
     creditor.

           (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if the property in mortgage is a cultivable land and the creditor has
     already planted crops in such a land at the time of redemption, the
     creditor shall be entitled to possess and enjoy such crops except as
     otherwise agreed upon between the creditor and the debtor.

445. Property in mortgage may be remortgaged: (1) A          person   who
     has obtained a property in mortgage shall be entitled to remortgage
     such property or any part thereof to another person in consideration
     for an amount which is equal to, or lesser than, the amount
     specified in the deed of mortgage, and in such a case, a re-mortgage
     is deemed to have been created.

           Provided that a mortgaged property shall not be the object of
     re-mortgage prior to the existence of the possessory right in such
     property.

           (2)   The period of possession and enjoyment of the re-
     mortgage given pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed the
     period of possession and enjoyment under the mortgage.




                                   242
           (3)        If the debtor who has right and ownership in the
     property intends to redeem the property re-mortgaged pursuant to
     sub-section (1), the debtor may redeem the property upon payment
     of the price directly from the re-mortgagee if the price of the re-
     mortgage is equal to the original price and through the original
     mortgagee if such price is less than the original price.

           (4)        Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, the transaction of remortgage made inconsistent with the
     terms of the mortgage shall ipso facto be void to the extent of such
     inconsistency.

           (5)        If the creditor is not entitled to possess the property re-
     mortgaged pursuant to this Chapter, the deed of such a re-mortgage
     shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali).

446. Fruits      or     benefits    of    property    may     be   mortgaged:
     Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 445, a creditor who
     has obtained a property in mortgage may, instead of remortgaging
     the whole property, remortgage only the fruits, benefit or facility of
     such property, or, if such property is a cultivable land, only the
     crops, products, trees, bamboo trees, reaped or to be reaped fruits,
     vegetables, flowers or any other kinds of products to be yielded
     from such land.

447. Mortgaging by third party on behalf of debtor: (1) A third
     person may, in consideration for a loan borrowed by a debtor,
     mortgage a property in which the third person has right and
     ownership to the creditor on behalf of the debtor.




                                         243
           (2)    The creditor shall, pursuant to this Chapter, be entitled
     to possess and enjoy the property mortgaged pursuant to sub-
     section (1) as if it were the property mortgaged by the debtor to the
     creditor.

           (3)    If a property is mortgaged by a third person pursuant to
     sub-section (1), the relationship between the debtor and the third
     person shall be governed by the deed of mortgage or other separate
     contract, and in the default of such provision, such transaction shall
     be equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali).

448. Property in mortgage to be indivisible: (1) A property mortgaged
     by a debtor to a creditor shall remain indivisible notwithstanding
     the creation of more than one creditor by virtue of the partition or
     succession between the creditor’s coparceners or the division
     between creditor’s partners, and the debtor shall not be entitled to
     redeem the whole or any portion of the mortgaged property until the
     loan borrowed by him or her is repaid in full in accordance with the
     deed of mortgage.

           (2)    If more than one debtor are maintained by virtue of the
     partition, succession between the debtor’s coparceners or division
     between the debtor’s partners, the mortgaged property shall not be
     liable to redemption until each debtor repays his or her respective
     portion of the loan in full.

449. Creditor to be liable for loss and damage to property in
     mortgage: (1) After the creation of the creditor’s possessory right
     in the property in mortgage, the creditor shall be liable for any kind
     of loss or damage, if any, caused to the property in mortgage.



                                    244
           (2)    In the event of any loss or damage to the property in
     mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1), the creditor shall so repair
     such property, at his or her cost, as to restore it into its original form.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the creditor shall not be liable for any loss or damage to the
     property in mortgage caused by a disaster, and the creditor shall
     repair such loss or damage with the debtor's consent in writing.

           (4)    The debtor shall, while redeeming the property in
     mortgage, pay also the expenses incurred in the maintenance under
     sub-section (3), in addition to the loan borrowed from the creditor.

450. Not to create trouble on property in mortgage: After the creation
     of the possessory right in the property in mortgage, the creditor
     shall not so trouble the debtor stating that such property is
     inappropriate or inaccurate or less as to be inconsistent with the
     terms of the deed.

           Provided that nothing shall bar the making of a claim for the
     repayment of a loan in accordance with the deed of mortgage if the
     creditor is not entitled to possess the property in mortgage for any
     reason or if the property is held to be defective for any reason.

451. Mortgage not to be made to foreigner: No person may mortgage
     an immovable property to a foreign person other than a person
     having obtained the non-resident Nepali citizenship, without prior
     approval of the Government of Nepal.

452. Not to be mortgaged or transferred in duplication: (1) No
     property once mortgaged may be mortgaged or transferred again, in
     duplication, to other person.


                                     245
      (2)      If a person mortgages a property in duplication in
contravention of sub-section (1), the deed registered at an earlier
date shall be valid and the subsequent deed shall ipso facto be void.

      (3)      If a deed becomes void pursuant to sub-section (2), the
amount of a creditor who knowingly executes the deed in
duplication shall lapse, and that of a creditor who executes it
without knowledge of duplication shall be equivalent to an
unsecured bond (Kapali).

      (4)      Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
in the event of the execution of deeds in duplication, and the first
deed providing for any kind of mortgage and the second deed
providing for the transfer of title, the transferee shall be entitled to
establish the title by making repayment of loan in accordance with
the first deed of mortgage.

      (5)      One who executes a deed in duplication as mentioned
in this Section shall be liable to the punishment with a fine of a sum
that is equal to the amount in controversy, if any, indicated in the
second deed, to the amount indicated in the earlier deed, if such
amount in controversy is not indicated in the second deed, and a
sum not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees if no such amount
is indicated even in the earlier deed.

      Provided that a fine in excess of one hundred thousand rupees
shall not be imposed irrespective of the sum of amount in
controversy.

      (6)      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in the event of the execution of the deed of mortgage in



                               246
      duplication, possessory right shall be established within two years
      from the date of the first deed if it provides for mortgage with
      possession (Bhogbhandhaki) and within two years from the date of
      entitlement to the possessory right if the first deed provides for
      mortgage without possessory right (Drishtibandhaki).

            (7)    In the event of a failure to establish the possessory
      right pursuant to sub-section (6), the creditor's amount shall be
      equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali).

453. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of
      limitation, if any, specified separately in this Chapter, and, in
      relation to the other cases, within a period of one year after the date
      on which any act was done or action was taken pursuant to this
      Chapter, by a person who is aggrieved from such an act or action.




                                    247
                               Chapter-13

     Provisions Relating to Pre-emption of Immovable Property

454. Pre-emption deemed to be made: If a person transfers, in any
      manner, any immovable property in which that person has right,
      ownership and possession to another person and anyone who is in
      neighbor of such property redeems it in accordance with this
      Chapter, pre-emption shall be deemed to be made.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “in
      neighbor of" includes a situation where a ditch, water supply,
      passage, exit etc. for one will be closed by the reason that one does
      not have other’s house or land that is bordering one’s house or land
      and has been transferred.

455. Entitlement of heir to pre-emption: (1) If a person sells his or her
      immovable property, the heir in neighbor of such property may pre-
      empt such property upon payment of the amount paid by the buyer
      of that property as well as the fees incurred in course of approval of
      deed to the buyer.

            (2)   If there are more than one heir who intend to make pre-
      emption pursuant to sub-section (1), the nearest heir, and, if such
      heirs are also more than one, the heir who is the most immediate
      neighbor, and, if even such heirs are more than one, all the heirs
      may pre-empt such property in equal proportion.

            (3)   If the nearest heir does not pre-empt such property
      pursuant to sub-section (2), the heir who is the nearest in the order
      of preference may pre-empt such property.




                                    248
456. Pre-emption by tenant: If there is no heir in neighbor of the
      property pursuant to Section 455 or even if there is an heir, he or
      she does not intend to make pre-emption and if there is a tenant in
      accordance with law in such a property, the tenant may pre-empt
      such property.

457. Pre-emption of sold house: (1) If there are different owners of the
      different parts of the same house and the owner of a part sells his or
      her part to another person, the owner of another part may, if he or
      she intends to pre-empt that part, preempt such a part of the house
      by paying the amount paid by the buyer and the fee incurred in the
      registration of the deed to the buyer.

            (2)    In making pre-emption pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      following person shall get preference as follows:

            (a)    If the owner of the other part is the heir, such an heir,
                   and if there are more than one heir, the nearest heir,

            (b)    If the owner of the other part is a person other than the
                   heir, the owner in neighbor of or the owner of the part
                   adjoining such a part.

458. Pre-emption of house donated or gifted: (1) Notwithstanding
      anything contained in Section 455,456 or 457, if any person
      relinquishes in any manner his or her right in and donates or gifts
      the half part of the same house or any portion thereof or the land
      occupied by or appurtenant to the house and the donee has
      transferred the right in the house or land in any manner to another
      person, the donor or his or her heir residing in the same place may,




                                    249
     if he or she so intends, pre-empt such a house or any portion thereof
     or the land occupied by or appurtenant to the house.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a person gets a donation or gift of the half part or any portion of
     the same house or the land occupied by or appurtenant to the house
     from a donor and the donor donates or gifts the remaining part of
     such a house or land to another person, the former donee or giftee
     or his or her heir may pre-empt such remaining part or portion.

           (3)    In making pre-emption pursuant to sub-section (1) or
     (2), the figure of price, if any, indicated in the instrument of
     donation or gift, and amount equal to the prevailing market price, if
     such figure is not so indicated, and the fees incurred in the
     registration of the deed shall be paid to the creditor.

           (4)    If, there are more than one heir intending to make pre-
     emption pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the nearest heir, and the
     most aggrieved heir, if even the nearest heirs are more than one,
     may make pre-emption.

459. Where pre-emption is not permitted: Notwithstanding anything
     contained in Sections 457 and 458, any part of or house built under
     the provision of joint housing shall not be subject to pre-emption.

460. Procedures for making pre-emption: (1) A person who intends to
     make pre-emption of any immovable property pursuant to this
     Chapter shall make a petition to the office making registration of
     the relevant deed, and such a petition has to be accompanied by a
     deposit of an amount equal to the price of the property to be pre-
     empted, if any, indicated in the deed registered for the transfer of



                                    250
such property, or an amount equal to the prevailing market price if
such price is not indicated in the deed, and the fees charged in the
approval of registration of such a deed.

      (2)    If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
office that approves the registration of the deed shall hold the
petitioner on recognizance and send a process of summon to the
person obliged to allow preemption to appear in the office, within a
period of seven days excluding the time required for journey.

      (3)    If the person obliged to allow preemption appears and
consents to preemption within the time limit as referred to in sub-
section (2), the office that approves the registration of the deed shall
effect preemption by paying to him or her the amount deposited
pursuant to sub-section (1).

      (4)    If, despite that the person obliged to allow preemption
does not appear and consent to preemption within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (2), it appears from the received petition,
registered deed and records of the office that pre-emption is to be
effected, the office that approves registration of the deed shall make
decision to effect pre-emption, and if it appears that pre-emption is
not to be made, that office shall make decision not to effect pre-
emption and give according information to the petitioner.

      (5)    If the person obliged to allow pre-emption does not
appear within the time limit referred to in sub-section (2), and, after
the expiration of the time limit, if it appears from the received
petition, registered deed and records of the office that pre-emption
is to be effected, the office shall make decision to effect pre-
emption and give an execution slip to the person entitled to pre-

                               251
emption to enjoy the property to be pre-empted, and send a notice
to the person obliged to allow preemption to receive the amount of
deposit made pursuant to sub-section (1).

      (6)    If the person obliged to allow pre-emption appears
within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (2) but expresses his
or her disagreement with the market price of such property, the
office that approves the registration of the deed shall fix the market
price of that property and effect pre-emption by having the amount
equal to that market price paid to the person obliged to allow pre-
emption.

      (7)   If any party does not agree to the market price of the
property subject to pre-emption fixed pursuant to sub-section (6) or
if the person obliged to allow preemption appears within the time
limit and shows the reason why pre-emption is not to be made, and
it is necessary to decide it upon examination of evidence on the
matter, the office that approves the registration of the deed shall
inform that the concerned person may make a lawsuit in the court
within thirty-five days; and in such a case, action shall be taken
pursuant to a decision of the court if a lawsuit has been filed within
the time-limit, and pursuant to a decision of the office if no such a
lawsuit has been filed.

      (8)    In returning the amount to the petitioner on holding
that pre-emption cannot be made pursuant to sub-section (4), two
and half percent of the amount deposited pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall be deducted.

      (9)    If the person who has petitioned for pre-emption does
not subsequently intend, for any reason, to make pre-emption or

                              252
     fails to appear at the appointed dates, the office shall punish that
     person with a fine of three percent of the amount of deposit
     furnished by him or her and the amount that remains after deducting
     that fine from the amount of deposit shall be returned to him or her.

461. To update records upon pre-emption: If it is held by the
     concerned office or court that pre-emption can be made pursuant to
     this Chapter, the office shall make entries into and update
     accordingly the records of the pre-empted property maintained in
     such an office.

462. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may file a lawsuit
     within thirty-five days after the date of knowledge thereof not later
     than six months after the date of registration of the deed.

           Provided that a tenant may file a lawsuit within thirty-five
     days after the date of expiration of the date within which the land-
     owner may make pre-emption.




                                   253
                               Chapter-14

      Provisions Relating to Approval of Registration of Deeds

463. Deed deemed to be registered: If any deed submitted by a person
     to the concerned office for approval pursuant to this Chapter is
     approved by such an office, such a deed shall be deemed to be
     registered.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     “concerned office” means such an office as may be designated by
     the Government of Nepal, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette,
     and includes the concerned Land Revenue Office until the office is
     so designated.

464. Deeds to be registered: (1) In making any of the following deeds,
     such a deed shall be got registered with the concerned office:

               (a)    A deed transferring the right in an immovable
                      property in any manner,

               (b)    A deed of mortgage with possession, mortgage
                      without possession or re-mortgage,

               (c)    A deed on donation or gift of immovable property
                      in testament,

               (d)    A deed on exchange of immovable property,

               (e)    A deed on partition or relinquishment of partition
                      share of property in common,

               (f)    A deed on separation of board and bread or
                      unification of board and bread,

               (g)    A deed on establishment of a trust,


                                      254
                 (h)      A deed on house renting with a monthly rent of
                          more than one hundred thousand rupees,

                 (i)      A deed on usufruct in an immovable property,

                 (j)      Such other deed required to be registered pursuant
                          to this Act or law.

           (2)         If any person fails to have registered a deed required to
     be registered pursuant to sub-section (1), such a deed shall not be
     legally recognized.

465. Other deeds may be registered: (1) A person may, if he or she so
     intends, have registered also any deed other than that set forth in
     Section 464.

           (2)         If a person makes an application for the approval of
     registration of a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned
     office shall register such deed by fulfilling the legal requirements.

466. Deed may be registered by commission: (1) If a person makes an
     application to the concerned office for the approval of registration
     of a deed by a commission deputed by the office and it appears that
     such a deed can be registered by that office, the chief of office or
     other employee deputed by him or her shall, on deposit with the
     office of the fees chargeable for such registration, visit the location
     indicated by the applicant within five days and register such a deed
     by fulfilling the legal requirements.

           (2)         If the deed is approved by a commission deputed
     pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall credit into revenue the
     deposit made pursuant to that sub-section.




                                        255
            (3)   If, for any reason, the deed is not approved and
     registered by a commission deputed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     applicant shall get refund of the deposit within three months.

            (4)   If the applicant fails to get refund of the deposit within
     the time-limit referred to in sub-section (3), the office shall credit
     such deposit into revenue.

467. Deed may be approved and registered with office in other
     district: (1) If the parties to a deed intend to get the deed approved
     and registered in a district other than the district in which either of
     them resides or the property is situated, they shall make an
     application, setting out the matter, to the concerned office of that
     district.

            (2)   If an application is made for the registration of a deed
     pursuant to sub-section (1), such an office shall make necessary
     inquiry into the matter and approve and register such deed by
     fulfilling the legal requirements.

            (3)   If a deed of immovable property is approved and
     registered in other district pursuant to sub-section (2), the office
     shall send a copy of the registered deed to the relevant office of the
     concerned district.

468. Fee chargeable for registration of deed: (1) The fee specified by
     law shall be charged for the approval and registration of a deed.

            (2)   Except where the law provides for the fee of approval
     and registration of a deed, fee shall be charged according to the
     amount set forth in the deed dealing with transaction of money.




                                   256
            Provided that if the price of the immovable property referred
      to in the deed is less than the minimum price specified by the
      Government of Nepal, the fee shall be charged according to the
      price specified by the Government of Nepal.

            (3)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
      or (2), in registering a deed in another district, there shall be
      charged an additional fee by ten percent of the fee set forth in that
      sub-section.

469. Obligation to pay fees: (1) The following person shall pay the fee
      chargeable for the registration of the following deed:

                  (a)      In the case of a deed transferring a property or
                           relating to mortgage, the transferee or mortgagee,

                  (b)      In the case of a deed on partition or relinquishment
                           of partition share, separation of board and bread or
                           unification of board and bread, all coparceners in
                           equal portion,

                  (c)      In the case of a deed on exchange of property, both
                           parties to the deed,

                  (d)      In the case of a deed of testamentary gift, the donor
                           or testator,

                  (e)      In the case of a deed on house renting, the house
                           lord,

                  (f)      In case of a memorandum of establishment of trust,
                           founder of a trust,




                                          257
                 (g)      In the case of any other deed, both parties to the
                          deed.

           (2)         In registering the deed referred to in clause (e) of sub-
     section (1), the fee shall be determined considering the amount of
     rent of the first month receivable for house rent as the price.

470. Provision relating to payment of amount: If any amount is to be
     paid and received between the parties to a deed according to the
     deed intended to be approved and registered, such payment may be
     effected either in household or in presence of the concerned
     employee of the office or by a good for payment cheque.

471. Transmission and registration and de-registration to be made:
     (1) If any transmission has to be effected in consequence of a deed
     registered, the concerned office shall execute transmission, and
     registration and deregistration of the matter on the day of
     registration of the deed, and on the following day if it is not
     possible to do so on that day.

           (2)         If any transmission and registration and deregistration
     of the matter have to be made in the records of another office
     according to the deed registered by one office, the latter shall give a
     time-limit of thirty-five days to the transferee, thereby informing
     him or her to go to the concerned office for the transmission, and
     registration and deregistration of the matter, and send also the deed
     to the concerned office.

           (3)         On receipt of a deed sent by another district for the
     transmission, and registration and deregistration of the matter
     pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned office shall enter the



                                        258
     matter of such registration into its records and effect transmission
     and registration and deregistration of the matter according to the
     deed.

472. Deed registered at earlier date to be valid: In the event of
     approval and registration of more than one deed in relation to the
     same matter, the deed approved and registered on the earlier date
     shall be valid.

473. Statute of limitation: (1) A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
     within six months after the date on which such an act was done or
     action was taken.

             (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a deed is approved and registered by an office of another area, a
     lawsuit may be made within one year after the date of receipt by the
     concerned office of a copy of such a deed.




                                   259
                               Chapter-15

                   Provisions Relating to Transactions

474. Transaction deemed to be made: (1) If there is give-and-take of
     any amount or goods between two or more persons subject to any
     condition, transaction shall be deemed to have been made between
     them.

             (2)   If a transaction is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     receiver of amount or goods shall return the same to the giver of
     amount or goods.

             Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     “amount” includes the price of a goods.

475. Loan deemed to be borrowed: If a person has an obligation to pay
     any amount or goods to another person in any manner, such
     obligation shall be deemed to be a loan borrowed by that person,
     and such a person shall return such amount or goods to the
     concerned person, subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

476. Transaction not to be carried on without executing deed: No
     person shall carry on transaction without executing a deed in
     accordance with law.

             Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     “deed” means any document that substantiates a transaction
     including a cheque, bill, voucher and receipt.

477. Matters to be set out in deed: In carrying on a transaction, the
     following matters shall be set out in the deed according to the
     nature of transaction:



                                    260
(a)   Name, surname, age and address of each person
      involved in transaction, and name of his or her
      father, mother, grand-father and grand-mother,

         Provided that in the case of a married person, the
      name of his or her husband or wife, as the case may
      be, shall also be mentioned.

(b)   Reason for transaction,

(c)   Volume of transaction,

(d)   In the case of transaction of any good, price of such
      goods,

(e)   In the case of exchange of any goods by way of
      borrowing, loan or otherwise, the matter to that
      effect,

(f)   Details of the goods, if any, exchanged,

(g)   Date for repayment of the transacted amount,

(h)   Rate of interest, if any, payable on the transaction,

(i)   Matter that the creditor may recover the amount
      involved in the transaction from the borrower's
      assets in the event of failure to repay such amount
      within the specified time or to fulfill the other
      conditions set forth in the deed,

(j)   Place of the deed executed,

(k)   Date of the deed executed,

(l)   Such other matters as required to be set out
      according to the nature of transaction.

                    261
478. Entitlement of creditor to interest from debtor: (1) If a deed on
     transaction provides for the payment of interest, the creditor may
     collect the interest from the debtor as set forth in the deed.

           (2)    The amount of interest which the creditor is entitled to
     collect from the debtor pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed
     ten percent of the principal per annum.

           (3)    If the deed executed pursuant to sub-section (1) does
     not provide for the rate of interest but only for the payment of
     interest, the creditor may collect interest from the debtor at the rate
     of ten percent of the principal per annum.

           (4)    If the deed executed pursuant to sub-section (1)
     provides for the payment of profit instead of interest but does not
     specify the amount of such profit, the creditor may collect such
     profit from the debtor as if it were interest.

479. Creditor not allowed to collect interest from debtor: If the deed
     on transaction does not provide for the payment of interest, the
     creditor shall not collect interest from the debtor.

480. Compound interest not to be collected: (1) The creditor shall not
     collect compound interest from the debtor.

           (2)    If any creditor collects compound interest from a
     debtor in contravention of sub-section (1), such interest shall be
     deducted from the principal and refunded if the principal has
     already been repaid.

481. Interest    in   excess   of   principal     not   to    be   collected:
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the
     creditor shall not collect interest in excess of the principal.


                                    262
482. Procedures to be fulfilled in paying and collecting principal and
     interest: The following procedures shall be fulfilled in paying and
     collecting interest:

           (a)    If the debtor repays the whole of the principal and
                  interest, the creditor shall sign and return the deed on
                  transaction to the debtor by tearing out the deed or
                  indicating on its space or reverse side that the loan has
                  been repaid,

           (b)    If the deed is not found at the time of repayment of the
                  principal and interest pursuant to clause (a), the
                  creditor shall give the debtor a receipt indicating the
                  receipt of the particular amount on the particular date,

           (c)    In repaying some amount out of the principal and
                  interest, the creditor shall indicate on the reverse side
                  of the deed how much he or she has received from the
                  debtor on which date, and get the debtor to sign the
                  deed and issue a separate receipt of amount
                  accordingly if the deed is not found immediately or it
                  is not with the creditor for the time being.

483. Interest accruable as of the date of recovery of amount:
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if
     the court passes a judgment on a lawsuit, if any, made within the
     period under Section 484 entitling the creditor to recover interest as
     well, the creditor shall be entitled to the interest as of the date of
     recovery according to the judgment.




                                   263
484. Period of deed executed in household: (1) The period of a deed
     executed in household pursuant to this Chapter shall not exceed ten
     years.

              (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if the debtor repays some of the principal or interest thereon to the
     creditor or the term of a deed is extended for the repayment of
     principal or interest within the period of ten years, another period of
     ten years shall be extended from the date of such repayment of
     principal or interest or extension of the period, as the case may be.

485. Transaction carried on with incompetent or quasi-competent
     person not to be recognized: A transaction carried on by a person
     with an incompetent or quasi-competent person shall not get legal
     recognition.

486. Recovery of amount not available from property in common:
     (1) If any person carries on transaction with another person and the
     deed of such transaction does not bear the signature of the person
     acting as the head of family, the creditor shall not be entitled to
     recover his or her amount from such property until the debtor's right
     in the property in common is established.

              (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if the person acting as the head of family repays such amount, the
     creditor may recover the same.

              (3)   If any person is not able to recover the amount from
     the debtor on the occurrence of the circumstance referred to in sub-
     section (1), the creditor shall make a lawsuit against the debtor and
     maintain his or her right within a period of ten years.



                                    264
           (4)    In the event of the maintenance of the right with the
     debtor pursuant to sub-section (3), the creditor may recover his or
     her amount from the debtor in accordance with law after his or her
     right in the property in common has been established.

           (5)    The statute of limitation for making a lawsuit shall, for
     the recovery of the amount pursuant to sub-section (4), commence
     from the date of establishment of the debtor's right.

487. Exchange of movable property not allowed without consent: (1)
     A person of majority age in a joint family is not allowed to
     exchange any movable property in common without consent of the
     person acting as the head of family.

           Provided that the consent of the person acting as the head of
     family shall not be required to exchange his or her private property.

           (2)    If a person exchanges a movable property in
     contravention of sub-section (1), the exchange of such property
     shall not be valid if the person acting as the head of family does not
     consent to such exchange.

           (3)    If there is no consent of the person acting as the head
     of family to the exchange of movable property made in
     contravention of sub-section (1), the property so exchanged may be
     taken back within thirty-five days.

488. Recovery of amount if transaction appears to have been carried
     on: Even though any person does not execute a deed by fulfilling
     the procedures referred to in this Chapter, if it appears from any
     deed, banking transaction, negotiable instrument, cheque, voucher
     or book of account that transaction has been carried on with any


                                   265
     person, the court may, based on such deed, banking transaction,
     negotiable instrument, cheque, voucher or book of account, order
     the recovery of such amount from the debtor to the lawsuit maker.

489. Procedure to be followed if deed executed on household is lost
     or destroyed due to force majeure event: (1) If a deed executed in
     household is lost or destroyed due to a force majeure event, the
     creditor shall make an application, setting out the matter, to the
     concerned Local Level within fifteen days from the date of loss or
     occurrence of the force majeure event.

           (2)    If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the concerned Local Level shall draw up a receipt setting out the
     matter and issue the receipt, sealed with the stamp of the office, to
     the applicant.

           (3)    If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the Local Level shall summon the presence of the deed executor, if
     he or she is alive, and of the nearest heir, if such executor is not
     alive, within seven days, and cause a deed to be prepared as per the
     original deed, if he or she so consents, and authenticate such deed
     and deliver it to the applicant.

           (4)    If the deed executor does not consent to execute
     another deed indicating that the deed was lost or destroyed due to a
     force majeure event pursuant to sub-section (3), the creditor shall
     make a lawsuit and maintain his or her right, showing the evidence
     of the loss of deed or occurrence of the force majeure event, within
     thirty-five days of the expiry of that time-limit.




                                    266
490. To return goods transacted in the event of imperfection: (1)
      Except as otherwise provided for in the deed, if the receiver of any
      goods transacted with specification of price is not able to possess
      the goods due to the fact that the goods do not correspond to that set
      forth in the deed or are imperfect for any reason, he or she shall
      give a notice thereof to the giver of goods within thirty-five days of
      such transaction.

            (2)    If a notice is received from the receiver of goods
      pursuant to sub-section (1) and his or her statement appears to be
      reasonable, the exchange of goods shall be made if the giver has
      similar other goods, and if the giver does not have such goods, he or
      she shall get back his or her goods and cancel the deed executed in
      relation to such transaction.

            (3)    If the giver of goods refuses to exchange or to take
      back the goods pursuant to sub-section (2), the receiver of goods
      may make a lawsuit to have recovery of an amount equivalent to
      the price of such goods and a reasonable compensation for the loss
      and damage caused to him or her from the concerned person or get
      such transaction to be void.

491. To return goods in original condition: (1) If any person obtains or
      borrows for any specific purpose any goods owned or possessed by
      another person whether for rent or not or for borrowing or not or on
      any other terms and conditions, the person shall, after the
      completion of the purpose, return the goods that are the same in
      kind, quantity and quality as have been so acquired or borrowed, to
      the owner or possessor.




                                      267
            (2)    If the goods obtained pursuant to sub-section (1) are
      lost, broken, destroyed, out of order or otherwise damaged, except
      as otherwise provided for in the deed, the person obtaining such
      goods shall return similar other goods to the owner or possessor or
      pay to the owner or possessor an amount equivalent to the
      prevailing market price of such goods if similar other goods are not
      available.

            (3)    Except as otherwise provided for in the deed in relation
      to the return of, or payment of rent or amount for, the goods
      pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), such goods or rent shall be
      returned or paid to the owner or possessor within fifteen days after
      the completion of the purpose for which the goods were obtained.

            (4)    If the person obtaining the goods fails to return or pay
      the goods or amount to the owner or possessor within the time-limit
      under sub-section (3), the aggrieved person may recover the amount
      of such goods and a reasonable compensation, as well, for the loss
      caused to him or her.

492. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
      making a lawsuit in the matter of transaction carried on with intent
      to take rights to, misappropriate, cause loss to, or disorder, the
      property of an incompetent and quasi-competent person or in the
      matter of collection of compound interest or collection of interest in
      excess of ten percent.

            (2)    Except as provided for in sub-section (1), a person who
      is aggrieved from any act done or action taken pursuant to this
      Chapter may make a lawsuit as follows from the date of such act or
      action:

                                    268
(a)   Where this Chapter provides for a separate statute
      of limitation for making a lawsuit, within such
      limitation,

(b)   Within a period of one year from the date of
      expiration of the period, if any, specified in any
      deed, and failing such a deed, or in the other cases,
      from the date of accrual of the cause of action.




                    269
                                  Part-5

       Provisions Relating to Contract and Other Obligations

                               Chapter-1

             General Provisions Relating to Obligations

493. Obligation to be created: (1) If there is a legal compulsion for
     one to do or to abstain from doing any act, an obligation is created
     if one omits to do or does such an act.

           (2)    The obligation to be created pursuant to sub-section (1)
     shall be maintained and determined pursuant to this Chapter.

494. Circumstances in which obligation is created: (1) The obligation
     under Section 493 shall be created and maintained as follows:

           (a)   By a law,

           (b)   By a contract,

           (c)   By an indirect or quasi-contract,

           (d)   By an unjust enrichment,

           (e)   By an unilateral commitment of any person to assume
                 obligation,

           (f)    By an act to be treated as tort under law,

           (g)    By an act to be treated as a quasi-tort under law.

      (2) In regard to sub-section (1),

           (a)   The obligation referred to in clause (a) shall be created
                 under this Act or other law.

           (b)   The obligation referred to in clause (b) shall be created
                 under a contact entered into between the parties.

                                   270
           (c)    The obligation referred to in clause (c) shall be created
                  under an indirect or quasi-contact as defined in
                  Chapter-15 of this Part.

           (d)    The obligation referred to in clause (d) shall be created
                  under an unjust enrichment as defined in Chapter-16 of
                  this Part.

           (e)    The obligation referred to in clause (e) shall be
                  determined under provision for creating obligation
                  under law through an unilateral commitment.

           (f)    The obligation referred to in clause (f) shall be created
                  under torts as defined in Chapter-17 of this Part.

           (g)    The obligation referred to in clause (g) shall be created
                  from the defective product as defined in Chapter-18 of
                  this Part or from other act to be deemed as a quasi-tort
                  under law.

495. Obligation to be fulfilled: (1) A person shall himself or herself
     fulfill the obligation of any matter which has been so maintained or
     created as to be fulfilled by him or her or which he or she has
     undertaken to fulfill.

           (2)    If such a person dies or becomes of unsound mind prior
     to the fulfillment of the obligation pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     heir succeeding to his or her property or his or her guardian or
     curator or the guarantor in the case of a contract relating to
     guarantee shall fulfill such obligation.




                                   271
496. Obligation to be fulfilled within the prescribed time: (1) If a
      certain period has been specified for fulfilling any obligation, the
      concerned person shall fulfill such an obligation within that period.

             (2)    If a certain day or time has been specified for fulfilling
      any obligation, the concerned person shall fulfill such obligation on
      that day or at that time.

             Provided that if there is a stipulation that the obligation shall
      be fulfilled within certain day or time, the obligation may be
      fulfilled even prior to such day or time.

             (3)    If no period, day or time has been specified under sub-
      section (1) or (2), the period, day or time for fulfilling the
      obligation shall be determined having regard to the nature of
      obligation and the obligation shall be fulfilled within a reasonable
      period.

             (4)    If any obligation is not fulfilled pursuant to sub-section
      (1), (2) or (3), the person who is bound to fulfill the obligation shall
      be deemed to have not been fulfilled, or to have been unable to
      fulfill, the obligation.

497. Each person to fulfill obligation: (1) If more than one person have
      undertaken to fulfill an obligation or such an obligation has been
      created in relation to them, every person shall, except as otherwise
      provided for in the contract, fulfill such an obligation equally.

             (2)    If any person is bound to fulfill any obligation vis-à-vis
      more than one person, he or she shall, except as otherwise provided
      for in the contract, fulfill the obligation vis-à-vis every person
      equally.


                                     272
498. Obligation may be divisible: (1) If any obligation has to be
     fulfilled vis-à-vis or by more than one person and the obligation
     vis-à-vis or by such persons is capable of being divided or
     fragmented, having regard to its nature, such obligation may be
     divided and shall be fulfilled by or vis-à-vis every person
     accordingly.

           (2)      In the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), every
     person or all persons may demand for the fulfillment of the
     obligation by every person or all persons bound to fulfill such
     obligation.

499. Obligation to be fulfilled in good faith: The person who is bound
     to fulfill the obligation created pursuant to Section 494 shall fulfill
     it in good faith.

500. To bear compensation for failure to fulfill obligation: (1) If a
     person bound to fulfill any obligation fails to fulfill it or delays its
     fulfillment, and thereby a loss or damage is caused to any other
     person in any manner, such a person shall bear compensation for
     the actual loss or damage so caused.

           (2)      If a person bound to fulfill any obligation does not
     fulfill it by fraud or does any act knowingly or recklessly, thereby
     any loss or damage is caused in any manner, such a person shall
     bear compensation for the loss or damage so caused.

501. Obligation contrary to law not to be fulfilled: Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the fulfillment of
     any obligation would be contrary to law, public order or public
     morality, it shall not be required to fulfill such an obligation.



                                     273
502. Impossible obligation not to be fulfilled: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if, at the time of its
     creation, any obligation of such nature as is impossible for
     fulfillment has been created, such an obligation shall not be
     required to be fulfilled.

           (2)    If any obligation which was possible for fulfillment at
     the time of its creation subsequently becomes impossible for
     fulfillment, the consequence of such obligation shall be determined
     according to the law.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
     or (2), if a portion of any obligation can be fulfilled and the rest
     portion cannot be fulfilled, the obligation shall be fulfilled to the
     extent that it can be fulfilled.

503. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years from the date of the accrual of the cause of action.




                                        274
                                Chapter-2

            Provisions Relating to Formation of Contracts

504. Contract deemed to be made: (1) If an agreement enforceable by
     law is concluded between two or more persons to do or abstain from
     doing any act, a contract shall be deemed to be concluded.

           (2)    For the purposes of sub-section (1), a contract shall be
     deemed to have been concluded once the person to whom an offer
     has been made by another person communicates his or her
     acceptance thereto.

           (3)    Once a contract is concluded, a binding legal
     relationship shall be created between the parties to it.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,

           (1)    “Offer” means an offer made by one person to another
                  person with the intent of obtaining his or her acceptance
                  to do or abstain from doing any act.

           (2)    “Acceptance” means the acceptance given by the person
                  to whom the offer has been made in the same meaning
                  in which the offer is made.

505. Contract enforceable by law: (1) A contract concluded in
     fulfillment of the following conditions shall be deemed to be a
     contract enforceable by law:

           (a)    The consent expressed by a person to a contract to bind
                  himself or herself,

           (b)    Capacity or qualification of a person to a contract to
                  conclude the contract,


                                    275
           (c)    Certain matter for the creation of an obligation,

           (d)    Lawful obligation.

           (2)    A contract may be made in written or verbal form or
     even by conduct of the parties to it.

           (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
     there is a requirement that a particular contract be concluded in
     fulfillment of any particular procedure or formality, such a contract
     may not be enforceable unless such procedure or formality is completed.

506. Persons competent to concluded contract: (1) Every person other
     than the following persons shall be competent to conclude a contract:

           (a)    One who is a minor,

           (b)    One who is of unsound mind.

           Explanation:

           (1)    A person who is usually of unsound mind, but
                  occasionally of sound mind, may conclude a contract
                  when he or she is of sound mind.

           (2)    A person who is usually of sound mind, but occasionally
                  of unsound mind, may not conclude a contract when he
                  or she is of unsound mind.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     any person who is deemed incompetent to conclude a particular
     contract under the law shall not be deemed to be a competent to
     conclude such a contract.




                                    276
            (3)     In concluding a contract on behalf of a person who is
      incompetent or quasi-competent, his or her guardian or curator may
      conclude such a contract.

            (4)    In concluding a contract on behalf of a legal person, it
      shall be conclude by a decision of the director or directors
      authorized for the management and operation of such a person or by
      a person authorized by such a director or directors.

            (5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if a person deemed to be incompetent to conclude a contract
      under this Chapter on any particular matter is competent by other law
      to conclude a contract on such a matter, such a person shall be
      deemed to be competent to conclude a contract on that matter.

507. Parties to be autonomous: The parties to a contract shall, subject to
      this Act, be autonomous to choose the form and contents of the
      contract, to determine terms and conditions of the contact and the
      nature of the remedy for its breach as well as to determine the
      measures for resolving disputes arising out of it.

508. Offer and acceptance deemed to be completed: (1) Once the
      offeree comes to the knowledge of an offer, the act of making the
      offer shall be deemed to have been completed.

            (2)    The act of giving acceptance shall be deemed to be
      completed, in case of the offerer, if the offerer receives the
      acceptance forwarded by the offeree to the offerer having indicated
      his or her acceptance to the offer, and in case of the offeree, if the
      offerer comes to know that the offeree has accepted the offer.




                                     277
           (3)     Even though there is no expression of acceptance to the
     offer directly, if the offeree abides by any terms mentioned in the
     offer by way of his or her conduct or accepts the advantage or
     service mentioned in the offer or indicates acceptance in any other
     manner, the offeree shall be deemed to have accepted the offer.

           (4)     If the offerer makes an offer having stipulated certain
     time and specifies that the offer is regarded as accepted if a notice
     of its rejection is not sent within such time, and if the offeree does
     not send a notice of acceptance of the offer within such time, the
     offer shall not be deemed to have been accepted.

509. Offer or acceptance may be revoked: (1) The offerer may revoke
     his or her offer through a notice.

           Provided that, if the offerer has received from the offeree a
     notice to the effect that he or she has accepted the offer before
     receiving a notice of revocation of the offer, such an offer shall not
     be revoked.

           (2) The offeree may revoke his or her acceptance by a notice.

           Provided that if the offerer has already received the notice of
     acceptance before receiving the notice of its revocation, such an
     acceptance shall not be revoked

           (3)     The person who has sent a notice expressing his or her
     refusal of the offer may again send a notice expressing his or her
     acceptance to the offer.

           Provided that, if the notice of refusal out of the notices of
     refusal or acceptance reaches first, the contract shall not be deemed
     to have been concluded, and if the notice of acceptance reaches first,


                                   278
    the contract shall be deemed to be concluded.

          (4)   If the notice under sub-section (1) has been sent after
    sending the offer, the notice under sub-section (2) has been sent
    after sending acceptance or the notice under sub-section (3) has
    been sent after sending a notice of refusal and the concerned person
    receives such notices at the same time, the contract shall not be
    deemed to have been concluded.

          (5)   If the offeree sends an acceptance with condition or
    with alteration to the offer sent by the offerer, the offeree shall be
    deemed to after a counter offer.

510. Offer deemed to be revoked: An offer shall be deemed to been
    revoked in any of the following circumstances:

          (a)   If the offerer makes an offer with a condition that a
                notice of acceptance to the offer be given within any
                certain time, and the offerer does not receive a notice
                of acceptance by the offeree within that time,

          (b)   If the time for sending a notice of acceptance is not
                specified pursuant to clause (a) and the offeree does
                not give a notice of acceptance to the offerer within a
                reasonable time,

          (c)   If the offerer, after making the offer, dies or becomes
                insane before receiving the acceptance,

          (d)   If the offer is revoked pursuant to Section 509,

          (e)   Even if the acceptance was given by the offeree, the
                offeree dies or becomes insane before the offerer
                receives the acceptance,

                                   279
           (f)   If the offeree sends a counter offer pursuant to sub-
                 section (5) of Section 509,

           (g)   If the offerer makes an offer on a condition that the
                 offeree has to do any act or fulfill any condition before
                 accepting the offer, and acceptance is made without
                 doing such an act or fulfilling such a condition.

511. Contract according to offer made before the public: (1) If a
     person makes an offer publicly by means of an advertisement that
     he or she will pay certain remuneration to any person for doing any
     act specified in the advertisement, and if any person does such an
     act, the advertiser shall pay remuneration specified in the
     advertisement to such a person.

           Provided that if a person does the act specified in the
     advertisement without knowing such advertisement, such a person
     shall not be entitled to the remuneration.

           (2)   If more than one person do the act specified in the offer
     under sub-section (1), only the person who does the act first shall
     be entitled to the remuneration.

           Provided that if two or more persons do the act specified in
     the offer at the same time, all of such persons shall be entitled to
     the equal share of the remuneration, and if the remuneration is
     incapable of being shared, the proceeds of the sale of the
     remuneration shall be equally divided among them.

           (3)   If a specific period is prescribed for doing the act
     according to the advertisement published pursuant to sub-section
     (1), the offer made according to the advertisement shall be deemed


                                   280
     to have been revoked immediately after the expiry of that period.

            (4)   An offer made pursuant to sub-section (1) may be
     revoked through the same medium through which it was published.

           (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
     if anyone has already done the act specified in the advertisement
     under sub-section (1) before the publication of the notice of
     revocation of the offer, the remuneration specified in the
     advertisement shall be provided.

           Provided that the person who does the act specified in the
     advertisement shall notify the advertiser of the completion of the
     act as soon as possible.

           (6)    If any person begins to do the act specified in the
     advertisement under sub-section (1) by giving its notice to the
     advertiser, appropriate remuneration shall be paid to such a person
     for the act done until the revocation of the advertisement.

512. Place of formation of contract: (1) The place where the offerer
     sends an offer expecting to receive its acceptance shall be deemed
     to be the place of formation of the contract.

           (2)    If the place is not specified pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the place where the offerer receives acceptance shall be deemed to
     be the place of formation of the contract.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1)
     and (2), if the parties specify the place of its formation in the
     contract, such a place shall be deemed to be the place of formation
     of the contract.




                                   281
513. Contingent contract: (1) If a contract is concluded to do or not to
     do any act if some event happens in the future, such a contract shall
     create no obligation until such an event happens.

            (2)    If a contract is so concluded as to be deemed to be
      concluded if any person does a particular act in the future, such a
      contract shall create no obligation if such a person does anything by
      which he or she becomes unable or it becomes impossible for him
      or her to do such an act.

            (3)    If a contract is concluded to do or not to do any act if
      any uncertain event does not happen in the future, the obligation
      under such a contract shall arise only after such an event becomes
      impossible to happen.

            (4)    If a contract is concluded to do or not to do any act if
      any event happens within any fixed time in the future, the contract
      shall be deemed to be void after such an event becomes impossible
      to happen within, or after the expiry of, the fixed time.

            (5)    If a contract is concluded to do or not to do any act if
      any event does not happen within any fixed time in the future, the
      obligation under such a contract shall arise if such an event does not
      happen or it becomes certain that such an event will not happen
      within the fixed time.

514. Application of general provisions of contract: The provisions
      contained in this Chapter and Chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this Part shall,
      generally, be applicable, to the other contracts to be concluded
      according to this Act or law.




                                      282
515. Interpretation of contract: (1) A contract shall be interpreted
     according to the common intention of its parties.

           (2)    If the intention cannot be established pursuant to sub-
     section (1), a contract shall be interpreted according to the meaning
     of general understanding that a reasonable person of the same
     prudence as a party to the contract would give to it in normal
     circumstances.

           (3)    If one party to a contract knows or is deemed to know
     a statement and conduct of the other party, the contract shall be
     interpreted according to the intention of such a party.

           (4)    The terms and expressions used in a contract shall be
     interpreted in the light of the entire contract or the context in which
     such terms and expressions are used.

           (5)    A contract shall be interpreted in a manner so that all
     the terms used in the contract are given effect without separating
     some terms from others.

516. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may file a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.




                                   283
                               Chapter-3

                         Validity of Contracts

517. Void contracts: (1) A contract which is not valid according to law
      shall be deemed to be a void contract.

            (2)   The following contracts shall be void:

                  (a)    A contract that restraints anyone from exercising
                         any profession, trade or business which is not
                         prohibited by law,

                               Provided that a contract shall not be
                         deemed to be made in restraint of any profession,
                         trade or business in any of the following
                         circumstances:

                         (1)   Where a contract is concluded between a
                               buyer and a seller on the sale and purchase
                               of the goodwill of any trade or business,
                               the contract restraining the seller from
                               carrying on similar trade or business under
                               such goodwill for the time and at the place
                               specified in such contract,

                         (2)   A contract concluded between the partners
                               to restrain them from doing the same
                               profession, trade or business as that of the
                               partnership firm or any other profession,
                               trade or business together with other
                               persons who are competitors of the

                                   284
            profession, trade or business of the same
            nature other than the profession, trade or
            business of the partnership firm until the
            partnership exists,

      (3)   A contract concluded between the partners
            restraining     them    from    exercising   a
            profession, trade or business of the
            partnership firm for a certain reasonable
            period or at a certain place after being
            separated from the partnership,

      (4)   A contract so concluded between a person
            and any person, firm, company or body
            that     the   person   is   restrained   from
            accepting the service of another person,
            firm, company or body who is the
            competitor of such other person, firm,
            company or body until the person is in the
            service of, or for a specified period after
            retirement from the service of, such other
            person, firm, company or body.

(b)   A contract in restraint of a marriage other than
      one prohibited by the law,

(c)   A contract restraining any one from enjoying the
      facilities being enjoyed by the public,




                   285
(d)   A contract restraining legal right of any person
      from being enforced by a court,

(e)   A contract concluded contrary to law or on a
      matter prohibited by the law in force,

(f)   A contract made for an immoral purpose or
      against public order or public interest,

(g)   A contract which cannot be performed because
      the parties thereto do not exactly ascertain or
      know about the matter in relation to which it has
      been concluded,

(h)   A contract the performance of which is
      impossible at the time of its conclusion or a
      fictitious contract,

(i)   A contract which is vague because of its subject
      matter being incapable of giving a reasonable
      meaning,

(j)   A contract concluded by a person not competent
      to make contract,

(k)   A contract with an illegal purpose,

(l)   A contract concluded by mistake of both parties
      as to the essential fact of the contract at the time
      of its conclusion.




                 286
            (3)   A void contract is invalid ab initio and it shall create
      neither any legal consequence nor any right and obligation of its
      parties.

            (4)   Even if any part of a contract becomes void, its
      remaining parts shall be enforceable according to law.

518. Voidable contracts: (1) A contract which, at the initiation of its
      party, may be declared void by the court shall be deemed to be a
      voidable contract.

            (2)   The person aggrieved from any of the following
      contracts may get the contract voided by the court:

            (a)   A contract concluded by coercion,

                  Explanation: If a person detains or threatens to detain
                  any property of another person or threatens to put that
                  other person's body, life or prestige in peril or commits
                  or threatens to commit any other act forbidden by law,
                  with the intention of causing that other person to enter
                  into a contract against his or her will, the person is said
                  to commit coercion.

            (b)   A contract concluded by undue influence,

                  Explanation:

                  (1)      Undue influence means an influence exercised
                           by a person over another person who is under his
                           or her influence or who may be employed
                           according to his or her will with the intention of



                                     287
            taking any unfair advantage for his or her
            interest or concern.

      (2)   Without prejudice to the generality of clause (1),
            the following person is deemed to be under
            influence or who may be employed according to
            his or will:

            (a)    A person who is under his or her
                   guardianship, curatorship or custody,

            (b)    A person who is incapable of representing
                   his or her interest for the time being or
                   forever by reason of age, illness or
                   physical or mental distress,

            (c)    A person who may be subjected to
                   financial or positional influence of that
                   other person.

(c)   A contract concluded by fraud,

      Explanation: A party to a contract or his or her agent
      is said to commit fraud when he or she, with intent to
      deceive another party thereto or his or her agent, makes
      the suggestion, as to a fact, of that which is not true
      which he or she does not believe it to be true or does
      any act that is likely to make the other party or his or
      her agent believe it, or knowingly conceals a fact
      which is in his or her knowledge or does any such act
      as the law declares to be fraudulent.


                       288
      (d)   A contract caused by misrepresentation.

            Explanation: Misrepresentation means any of the
            following acts:

            (1)   Presenting a false description of any matter or
                  fact on without reasonable basis,

            (2)   Misleading any party to his or her detriment,

            (3)   Causing a mistake as to any matter of the
                  contract,

            (4)   Making assurance to have concluded a contract
                  in one subject and but causing to enter into it in
                  another subject.

      (3)   In the case of a voidable contract under this Section,
the following matters shall be governed as follows:

      (a)   The party caused to enter into a contract may, instead
            of having the contract voided, demand that his or her
            position be restored into the position that would have
            been had the contract not been concluded.

      (b)   If a contract is made with the person who is under his
            or her influence and whose will can be dominated by
            him or her, the party who claims that he or she has not
            exercised such undue influence shall have the onus to
            prove that the contract has not been caused by undue
            influence.




                              289
            (4)    A voidable contract shall, before it is voided, be
      enforceable as if it were a lawful contract.

            (5)    If a voidable contract under this Section is voided by
      the court, it shall not affect the act done under such contract before
      the voidance.

            (6)    If any contract is voided pursuant to this Section, the
      legal right or interest of a bona fide third party shall not be
      prejudiced merely by the reason of such voidance.

519. Unenforceable contracts: (1) A contract that is not enforceable by
      the court shall be regarded as an unenforceable contract.

            (2)    Any of the following contracts is not enforceable by
      the court in spite of its being concluded in fulfillment of the
      procedures under Chapter-2 of this Part:

            (a)    A contract required to be made in written form
                   according to law is not concluded in written form,

            (b)    A contract required to be made in fulfillment of any
                   particular formality or procedure or to be registered
                   with any body according to law is not so made in
                   fulfillment of such formality or procedure or is not so
                   registered,

            (c)    Where a contract is concluded on behalf of another
                   person, the contract is concluded on a matter not
                   authorized by, or concluded beyond the authority given
                   by, that other person.



                                    290
520. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit at any
     time, in the case of a void contract, within one year after the date of
     accrual of the cause of action for voidance, in the case of a voidable
     contract, and within two years after the date of accrual of the cause
     of action, in the case of other contracts.




                                    291
                                 Chapter-4

           Provisions Relating to Performance of Contracts

521. Obligation under contract to be fulfilled: Each party to a contract
      shall fulfill his or her obligation under the contract.

522. Reciprocal performance of contract: (1) If a contract is so
      concluded that the parties to the contract shall fulfill their respective
      obligations simultaneously and one party demonstrates such
      conduct or intention that he or she is not willing to fulfill his or her
      obligation materially, the other party need not perform his or her
      promise.

            (2)    If the contract fixes the order of priority for the
      fulfillment of any promise, the promise shall be fulfilled in that
      order, and failing the fixation of such an order, the party who is
      liable to perform the promise first according to the nature of the
      contract shall perform it first.

            (3)    If, in the case of a contract containing reciprocal
      promises, and performance of one promise depends on the
      performance of the other promise, one party cannot perform the
      contract because of the failure of the other party to perform his or
      her promise may recover the loss or damage caused by the failure of
      the other party to perform the contract.

            (4)    If a contract concluded for reciprocal promises to be
      simultaneously performed pursuant to sub-section (1) and one party
      prevents the other party from performing such a contract, the other
      party so prevented is entitled to rescind the contract and also to




                                     292
      recover the loss or damage, if any, caused to him or her in
      consequence of such termination of the contract.

523. Time and manner for performance of contract: (1) If a contract
      specifies the time and manner for its performance, the contract shall
      be performed within the specified time and in the specified manner.

            (2)      If a contract does not specify the time or manner for
      the performance of an act under the contract but the act can be
      performed only at any specific time or only in a specific manner,
      the contract shall be deemed to have been so concluded that the act
      has to be performed at that time and in that manner.

            (3)      If, except in the circumstance under sub-section (2), a
      contract does not specify the time and manner for its performance,
      the contract shall be performed within a reasonable time and in a
      reasonable manner.

524. Place for performance of contract: (1) If a contract specifies any
      particular place for the performance of any act, that act shall be
      performed at such a place.

            (2)      If, any party is required by a contract to hand over or
      deliver any goods to the other party and the contract does not
      specify the place for such hand-over or delivery of the goods, the
      contract shall be deemed to have been so concluded that the goods
      have to be delivered or handed over at the place where such goods
      are located.

            (3)      If a contract does not specify a particular place for the
      performance of an act but the act can be performed only at a
      particular place or has to be performed in any particular place


                                      293
     having regard to practice or usage or nature of the act, the contract
     shall be deemed to have been so concluded that the act has to be
     performed at that place.

           (4)    In any case other than those referred to in sub-sections
     (2) and (3), if a contract does not specify the place for the
     performance of an act, the party performing the act according to the
     contract shall notify the other party to specify a reasonable place for
     the performance of the act, and the other party shall specify a
     reasonable place for the performance of the act.

525. Performance of contract deemed to be delayed: (1) If a contract
     so made as to be performed at a particular time is not performed at
     or within such time, the performance of contract shall be deemed to
     have been be delayed.

           (2)    If the contract under sub-section (1) can be performed
     even after such time, one party of the contract may notify the other
     party to perform the contract, having given a reasonable time.

           (3)    If a notice is given pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     other party shall perform the contract accordingly, and may claim
     for compensation for any loss or damage caused in consequence of
     the delayed performance of the contract.

           (4)    If a contract is not performed pursuant to sub-section
     (3), the party giving such a notice may rescind the contract.

526. Time to be considered as essence of contract: (1) If the the
     purpose or objective of a contract cannot be achieved, in case of
     non-performance of the contract within a particular day, time or
     period, having regard to the nature of the contract or intention


                                   294
     shown by the parties at time of its conclusion, the time for the
     performance of such a contract shall be considered to be the essence
     of the contract.

           (2)     If either party of a contract does not perform the
     contract under sub-section (1) within such a day, time or period,
     such a contract shall be deemed to have been breached and the other
     party may rescind the contract immediately.

527. Circumstances where a contract needs not be performed: In any
     of the following circumstances, it is not necessary to perform any
     act under, or perform, a contract:

           (a)     If either party to a contract waives the other party from
                   fulfilling the obligation under the contract,

           (b)     If a voidable contract is voided by the party entitled to
                   do so,

           (c)     If the contract cannot be performed for the reason of its
                   breach by the other party,

           (d)     If it is not necessary to perform the act under the
                   contract by operation of any provision of this Part,

           (e)     If a contract which is unenforceable according to
                   Section 531.

528. Assignment of rights and liabilities under a contract: If any
     party to a contract dies or becomes insane, the rights accruing from
     the contract shall devolve on to the heir succeeding the property of
     such a party to the contract, and the heir himself or herself shall
     also bear the obligations to the extent of the property succeeded by
     him or her.

                                    295
             Provided that the rights and obligations accruing on the basis
     of personal skill and qualification shall not devolve on to such an
     heir.

529. Party who must perform contract: (1) Except in cases where a
     contract specifies that it must be performed by its party only, the
     contract may be performed by his or her agent or by a person
     appointed by him or her or by any other person on his or her behalf
     or the rights and obligations under the contract may be transferred.

             Provided that no party to a contract may transfer his or her
     obligations under the contract to another person without consent of
     the other party.

             (2)         The following terms and conditions shall be fulfilled in
     order to transfer rights and obligations under a contract pursuant to
     sub-section (1):

                   (a)      Unless the contract otherwise provides for, the
                            transfer shall be in written form,

                   (b)      The transfer shall be unconditional,

                   (c)      The transfer of rights or obligations is not
                            prohibited by law or the contract,

                   (d)      In the case of the transfer of rights and obligations,
                            a notice along with its time limit shall be given to
                            the other party.

             (3)         Once any party to a contract accepts any act done by a
     third person, that party shall not be entitled to claim subsequently
     that the act must be done by the party to the contract himself or
     herself, except as otherwise provided for in the contract.

                                          296
            (4)      If two or more persons jointly enter into a contract with
     another party, any or all of such joint promisors shall fulfill, or
     cause to be fulfilled, the obligations under the contract, except as
     otherwise provided for in the contract.

            (5)      The joint promisor who fulfills the obligation shall be
     entitled to recover damages or loss on a pro rata basis from the
     other joint promisors, in consideration for the default of any other
     joint promisor in the fulfillment of the obligation under sub-section
     (4).

            (6)      Even if one party releases one joint promisor of the
     other party to the contract concluded pursuant to in sub-section (4)
     from the obligation on his or her part, such release shall not
     discharge the other joint promisors from the obligation under that
     contract.

530. Only the parties to contract can demand its performance: (1)
     Only the person who is a party to a contract can demand the
     performance of the contract by the other party.

            Provided that if a contract is concluded for the benefit of any
     person, such a person can demand the performance of that contract
     even if he or she is not a party to such a contract.

            (2)      If two or more persons jointly enter into contract to do
     or not to do any act, all such a persons can jointly demand the
     performance of that contract, except as otherwise provided for in
     the contract.

531. Discharge of contracts in the event of fundamental changes in
     circumstances: (1) If it becomes impossible to perform a contract


                                      297
as a result of fundamental change in the circumstance existed at the
time of conclusion of the contract, the act according to the contract
need not be performed.

      (2)   Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1),
emergence of any of the following circumstances shall be deemed
to constitute a fundamental change in the circumstance existed at
the time of conclusion of a contract:

      (a)   If the contract becomes illegal and thereby it cannot be
             performed,

      (b)   If it becomes impossible to perform the contract due to
             emergence of situations beyond human control such as
             war, flood, landslide, fire, earthquake and volcanic
             eruption,

      (c)   If the subject matter essential for the performance of
             the contract is destroyed or damaged, or exists no
             longer, or such a subject matter could not be obtained,

      (d)   If the contract is so concluded that its performance
             depends on the personal ability, skill or talent of a
             person, and the performance of the contract becomes
             impossible by the reason that such a person dies or
             becomes insane or is incapable of performing the
             contract because of physical or mental disability.

      (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
none of the following circumstances shall be deemed to constitute a
fundamental change in the circumstance existed at the time of
conclusion of a contract:


                              298
      (a)   If the performance of the contract has become difficult,

      (b)   If the performance of the contract results in less profit
            or in loss,

      (c)   If any party to the contract is dependent upon any third
            party who is not a party to the contract for its
            performance, and the third party makes a default or
            becomes incompetent,

      (d)   In the event of a strike or lockout,

      (e)   If additional tax, fee or other revenue is required to be
            paid,

      (f)   If a contract is concluded with more than one object
            and some of the objects cannot be fulfilled.

      (4)   In the case of emergence of any of the circumstances
referred to in sub-section (3), the parties may, except as otherwise
provided for in the contract, negotiate to review or alter the terms
and conditions of the contract.

      (5)   If the performance of a contract becomes impossible by
the reason of a fundamental change in the circumstance as referred
to in sub-section (2), the following matters shall be governed as
follows:

      (a)   A party who has received any amount paid by the other
             party in consideration of the contract, prior to the
             occurrence of such a change in the circumstance, shall
             refund it to the other party,




                              299
           (b)    Payment to be made or due from one party to the other
                  party in consideration of the contract shall not be
                  payable after such a change in the circumstance.

           (c)    The amount payable to each other shall be determined
                  in consideration the act or amount already performed
                  or paid, if any, by one party to the other party before
                  such a change in the circumstance, and one party shall
                  be entitled to recover reasonable expenses incurred by
                  that party in consideration of the contract from the
                  other party.

           (6)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, the contracting parties may agree to fulfill their respective
     obligations by continuing the performance of the contract after the
     end of the circumstance under clause (b) of sub-section (2).

532. Facilities to be provided: (1) The parties to a contract shall
     provide to each other such facilities as may be needed to perform
     the contract from their respective sides.

           (2)    If the contract cannot be performed due to the failure to
     provide such facilities, the party in default of the performance shall
     not be held liable responsible.

533. Contract may be suspended or altered: (1) The parties to a
     contract may, if they so agree, change or alter all or any of the
     portions of the act to be performed under the contract, extend the
     time for the performance of any act under the contract, suspend the
     contract by not making it obligatory to perform any act to be
     performed under the contract for some time, substitute any act for



                                   300
     the act specified in the contract or make a new contract in
     substitution for the original contract.

           (2)    If any change or alteration is made to a contract
     pursuant to sub-section (1), a new contract shall be deemed to be
     made, and the new contract shall become effective accordingly.

           (3)    If a new contract is made pursuant to sub-section (2),
     the obligation under the original contract need not be borne except
     as otherwise provided for in the new contract.

534. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.




                                    301
                                   Chapter-5

          Provisions Relating to Breach of Contract and Remedies

535. Breach of contract deemed to occur: (1) If any party to a contract
      fails to fulfill the obligation under the contract or gives a notice to
      the other party that he or she will not perform the act to be
      performed by him or her under the contract or his or her action and
      conduct demonstrate that he or she is incapable of performing the
      act under the contract, the party shall be deemed to have breached
      the contract.

            (2)       If one party commits a breach of the contract pursuant
      to sub-section (1) or action or conduct of that party demonstrates
      non-performance of the contract in a material respect or
      demonstrates a material breach of the contract by the conduct or
      action of a party, the other party may rescind the contract by giving
      a notice to such a party.

            (3)       In the case of the rescission of the contract pursuant to
      sub-section (2), the party rescinding the contract shall not be bound
      to perform the contract.

536. Indivisible nature of the authority to rescind contract: If either
      party of a contract consists of two or more persons, the contract
      may be rescinded only if all of such persons rescind it or if the
      rescission is applicable to all of them.

537. Compensation for breach of contract: (1) In the case of breach of
      a contract under Section 535, the party aggrieved by it shall be
      entitled to recover from the party in breach of the contract damages
      for the actual loss or damage caused by the breach or such loss or


                                       302
damage which the contracting parties knew when they made the
contract to be likely result from the breach.

      (2)    If the parties to a contract, in anticipation, at the time
of its formation specify a sum in the contract, which becomes
payable for breach of the contract, the aggrieved party shall be
entitled to recover a reasonable amount not in excess of that sum
from the other party, pursuant to sub-section (1).

      (3)    If the contract does not provide for compensation
referred to in sub-section (2), the party claiming such compensation
shall be entitled to recover a reasonable amount for the direct and
actual loss or damage resulted from the breach of contract or for the
breach of contract or for compensation.

      Provided that no compensation may be recovered for any
indirect or remote loss or damage.

      (4)    If a contract, which is concluded for the completion of
any act within a fixed period, contains a provision that
compensation as referred to in sub-section (2) is payable if such an
act cannot be completed within that period, the party paying such
compensation may request for the extension of the period for the
completion of the contract in proportion to the amount of
compensation paid by him or her.

      (5)    The right of a party to a contract to seek other legal
remedies for the breach of a contract shall not be deemed adversely
affected merely by the reason that the amount of compensation has
been paid pursuant to this Section.




                              303
538. Consequences of rescission or voidance of contract: (1) If, after a
      party to a contract has already received some cash or kind or any
      other benefit from the other party or after the fulfillment of the
      obligations under the contract partially, the contract is rescinded by
      mutual consent of the parties and the performance of the contract is
      not required under this Part or other law, the contract is voided or
      declared to be void according to law or the contract becomes
      invalid or is rescinded under this Part, such cash, kind or service so
      received shall be returned upon having settled the accounts of the
      cash or kind given until the date of the contract being in force.

            (2)    If any service or advantage other than cash or kind has
      been given pursuant to sub-section (1), the party receiving such
      service or advantage shall pay a reasonable amount to the other
      party in consideration for such service or benefit.

            (3)    If it becomes necessary to institute legal action by the
      reason of failure to return the cash or kind or to pay the amount as
      referred to in sub-section (1), a reasonable expense incurred for that
      purpose may also be recovered.

539. Amount to be recovered in proportion to performed contract
      (quantum meruit): If a contract is rescinded by the reason of its
      breach by any party or for any other reason, the aggrieved party
      may claim for the payment by the other party of amount under the
      contract in proportion to the work done or the performance of
      contract made by that party.

540. Specific performance of contract: (1) If monetary compensation
      is not reasonable and adequate for the actual loss or damage
      suffered by the aggrieved party because of the breach of contract,

                                     304
      the aggrieved party may claim for the specific performance of the
      contract instead of compensation.

            (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      specific performance may not be claimed in any of the following
      circumstances:

                  (a)      If monetary compensation is an adequate remedy
                           for the breach of contract,

                  (b)      If the court cannot supervise the performance of the
                           act under the contract,

                  (c)      If the contract is for providing services of personal
                           ability, skill or knowledge,

                  (d)      If the contract cannot specifically be performed,

                  (e)      If the party in breach of the contract claims for its
                           specific performance.

541. Power of court to make order: (1) If the performance of a contract
      is not possible because any party to the contract is about to perform
      any act or conduct which is contrary to the nature of the contract,
      the party aggrieved by such an action or a conduct may file a
      complaint in the court to prevent such an act or conduct.

            (2)         If a complaint is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      court may issue an appropriate order to any party to immediately
      stop his or her particular action or conduct, subject to the settlement
      of the dispute arising out of that contract in accordance with such a
      contract or law.




                                         305
           (3)       If an order is issued pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     aggrieved party shall be entitled to also recover additional loss or
     damage caused from the failure of the other party to comply with
     the order so issued.

542. Compensation to be ascertained in monetary value: Except as
     otherwise provided for in the contract, assessment of compensation
     for any loss or damage as referred to in this Chapter shall be
     ascertained in monetary value.

           Provided that Section 540 shall apply to the remedy under
     that Section.

543. Power of court to consider matters: While determining
     compensation arising from the breach of a contract, the court shall
     consider matters including whether the party has breached the
     contract intentionally or whether the non-performance has occurred
     due to recklessness and how much money or benefit might have
     been received by the innocent party to the contract had the contract
     not been breached.

544. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from an act done
     or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within two
     years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.




                                     306
                                 Chapter-6

           Provisions Relating to Contract of Sale of Goods

545. Contract of sale of goods: (1) A contract of sale of goods shall be
      deemed to have been made if any seller agrees to transfer the
      property in goods immediately or in the future to the buyer for a
      price.

               Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      “goods” means any kind of movable property capable of being
      purchased or sold other than currency in circulation for the time
      being, security or actionable claim.

               (2)   A contract of sale of goods may be conditional or
      unconditional.

               (3)   A contract may be concluded to sell the goods owned
      or possessed by the seller for the time being or those to be produced
      or acquired by the seller in the future.

546. Contract of sale of goods to be void: If a contract is concluded to
      sell any specific type of goods, which have already become
      damaged at the time of or before making of the contract, and the
      seller is not aware about that at the time of making of the contract,
      the contract shall be void.

               Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
      “specific type of goods” means the specific goods mentioned in the
      contract at the time of making of the contract.

547. Determining price of goods: (1) Except as otherwise provided for
      in the contract, the price of goods shall be determined in the manner



                                     307
      agreed upon in the contract under the terms and conditions of the
      contract, or by the course of dealing between the parties.

            (2)         If the price of goods is determined according to their
      weight and measurement, the price of goods shall be determined on
      the basis of the net weight and measurement of such goods, except
      as otherwise provided for in the contract.

            (3)         If the price of goods cannot be determined under sub-
      section (1) or (2), the buyer shall pay the seller a reasonable price,
      taking into account the relevant circumstances.

548. Payment of price of goods: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
      the contract, the price of goods shall be paid as follows in any of
      the following circumstances:

                  (a)      The price of goods to be paid by the buyer to the
                           seller, at the time of the purchase of goods by the
                           buyer,

                  (b)      At the time of the transfer of the goods.

            (2)         While making payment of the price of goods pursuant
      to sub-section (1), it shall be paid in cash.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
      “cash” includes a cheque, traveler's cheque, promissory note, bill of
      exchange, letter of credit, bank draft, credit card and telegraphic
      transfer, payable through bank.

549. Description of goods: (1) If a contract specifies the name, brand,
      trademark or specification of any goods to be sold, the contract
      shall be deemed to have been concluded for the sale of the goods
      corresponding to that name, brand, trademark or specification.

                                         308
            (2)    If a contract specifies the name, brand, trademark or
      specification and the sample of goods to be sold, the bulk of such
      goods shall correspond not only to the sample but also to the name,
      brand, trademark or specification specified in the contract.

550. Condition as to title to goods to be sold: (1) Except as otherwise
      provided for in the contract, it shall be deemed that, in the case of a
      sale of goods, the seller has the title to the goods sold or, in the case
      of an agreement to sell the goods in the future, the seller has or will
      have the title to the goods to be sold, and that such goods are free
      from custody, control or possession by any other person.

            (2)    Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
      seller shall be deemed to have the right to sell the goods sold or to
      be sold.

551. Condition as to quality of goods:(1) Except as otherwise provided
      for in the contract, the goods sold or to be sold shall be deemed to
      be of satisfactory quality.

            (2)    If any goods sold or to be sold for any particular
      purpose are fit for that purpose, the goods sold or to be sold shall be
      considered to be of satisfactory quality.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
      if the contract itself specifies any defects of such goods or if the
      buyer has already knew such defects before the conclusion of the
      contract or while inspecting the goods, such goods shall not be
      deemed to be of unsatisfactory quality.

            (4)    If the quality of any particular goods is specified in the
      contract, the goods shall correspond to that quality, and if no


                                     309
     quality is so specified, the goods shall be of the quality according to
     the prevalent standards.

           (5)    Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
     seller shall not be deemed to have warranted that the goods sold or
     to be sold are of a particular quality.

552. Right to accept or reject goods of different quantity: (1) If the
     seller tenders to deliver to the buyer the goods of different quality
     than that specified in the contract, the buyer has the right to accept
     and take delivery of the goods in whole, to reject the whole or to
     accept any part and reject the rest of the goods.

           (2)    If any goods are rejected in whole or in part pursuant to
     sub-section (1), the buyer may give a notice to the seller to either
     deliver other goods instead of such goods or where the quality of
     such goods could be improved, to improve the quality of such
     goods.

           (3)    If a notice is given pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     seller shall deliver the other goods instead of such goods or improve
     the quality thereof, according to the notice given by the buyer or
     mutual understanding reached between them.

553. Deemed to be contract for sale by sample: (1) If a provision has
     been made in a contract to sell goods upon inspection of their
     samples directly or indirectly a contract of sale of goods is deemed
     to be a contract for the sale of goods upon inspecting sample.

           (2)    If a contract is concluded for the sale of goods by
     sample, the contract shall be deemed to contain the following
     conditions, except as otherwise provided for in the contract:


                                    310
                  (a)    The bulk of the goods shall correspond to the
                         sample in quality,

                  (b)    The buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity of
                         comparing the quality of the bulk of the goods
                         with the sample,

                  (c)    The goods sold or to be sold shall be free from
                         any defect, and such goods appear to be of
                         satisfactory quality, apparent on comparing them
                         with the sample.

554. Provisions relating to transfer of ownership of goods: (1) If there
      is a contract for the sale of any specific or certain goods, the
      transfer of such goods shall be made as provided for in the contract,
      and failing such provision in the contract, the transfer shall be made
      according to the terms and conditions of the contract, intention of
      the parties, ascertained by having regard the conduct of the parties,
      and the relevant circumstances.

            (2)   Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if a
      contract is concluded for the sale of any specific goods in a
      deliverable state, the parties shall be deemed to have the intention
      of transferring them when the contract is concluded or upon
      payment of the price of the goods.

            (3)   If a contract is concluded for the sale of any specific
      goods in a deliverable state and the buyer has to take measurement,
      weight, make examination of the goods or to perform some acts to
      determine the price of such goods, such goods shall not be




                                    311
      transferred until the buyer performs such acts and gives information
      thereof to the buyer within a reasonable time.

            (4)       Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, a
      contract shall be deemed to have been concluded so that the goods
      sold or to be sold shall be transferred in the place where such goods
      are situated.

            (5)       Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
      buyer shall be deemed to have the title or ownership of the goods at
      the time of the transfer of the goods to the buyer.

555. To bear risks: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in the contract,
      the seller shall bear the risk of any loss or damage to the goods until
      such goods are transferred to the buyer.

            (2)       If the transfer of goods has been delayed due to the
      fault of either the buyer or the seller, the party who has caused such
      delay shall bear the risk of loss or damage under sub-section (1).

            (3)       If the seller agrees to deliver the goods from the place
      of purchase to the place specified by the buyer, the seller shall bear
      the risk of any loss or damage to the goods, except as otherwise
      provided for in the contract.

556. Right of buyer to ascertain goods: If the delivery of the goods
      sold is tendered to the buyer, the buyer shall have a reasonable
      opportunity to examine and ascertain whether or not the goods
      conform to the contract and the buyer shall not be deemed to have
      been accepted the delivery of the goods until the buyer so ascertains.

557. Goods deemed to be accepted: The buyer shall be deemed to have
      accepted the goods in any of the following circumstances:


                                      312
            (a)    If the buyer or his or her agent receives the goods,

            (b)    If a receipt or slip is issued having acknowledged the
                   delivery of the goods,

            (c)    If the buyer stores the goods having ascertained,
                   pursuant to Section 556, that the goods conform to the
                   contract,

            (d)    If the goods reach the buyer and the buyer does not
                   inform the seller within reasonable time that he or she
                   has rejected the goods and retains the goods with him
                   or her.

            (e)    If the buyer does any act proving that he or she has
                   ownership in and control over such goods.

558. Time for delivery of goods: (1) If the contract provides that goods
      have to be delivered at any specific time or within any specified
      period, the seller shall deliver the goods to the buyer at that time or
      within that period.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if the buyer accepts the goods delivered by the seller before or after
      the time or period specified in the contract, the seller shall be
      deemed to have delivered the goods.

559. Documents concerning sold goods to be handed over: Except as
      otherwise provided for in the contract, the goods are delivered but
      such basic documents as are related to the ownership of the goods
      or required for their use are not handed over, the ownership of the
      goods shall not be deemed to have been transferred.




                                    313
560. Not to deliver of goods in quantity different from quantity
     specified in contract: (1) If the seller delivers to the buyer a
     quantity of goods less than the quantity specified in the contract, the
     buyer may reject the goods.

           Provided that if the buyer accepts the goods even in such
     quantity, the buyer shall pay the price of that quantity at the rate
     specified in the contract.

           (2)    If the seller delivers to the buyer a quantity of goods
     larger than the quantity specified in the contract, the buyer may
     accept the goods only in the quantity specified in the contract, and
     reject the rest or the whole quantity of goods.

           Provided that if the buyer accepts the whole quantity of
     goods so delivered, the buyer shall pay for the whole at the rate
     specified in the contract.

           (3)    If the seller delivers to the buyer the goods mixed with
     goods of a description different than specified in the contract, the
     buyer may accept the goods specified in the contract and reject the
     rest or the goods in whole.

           (4)    Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
     buyer shall not be bound to accept the delivery of goods in
     installments.

           (5)    Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if the
     buyer rejects the goods tendered by the seller for delivery, the buyer
     shall not be bound to return them to the seller.




                                   314
           Provided that the buyer shall give a notice of rejection, along
     with the reason for the same, to the seller through fastest means of
     communication.

561. Special provisions relating to compensation: Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Part, the following provisions
     shall apply to compensation for a contract under this Chapter:

           (a)   If the buyer does not accept or rejects the goods or
                 refuses to pay the price of the goods after the making
                 of a contract of the sale of goods, the seller may,
                 subject to the contract, claim compensation from the
                 buyer in consideration of the buyer's failure to accept
                 or refusal to accept the goods,

           (b)   While determining compensation under clause (a), if
                 the goods which the buyer has not accepted or has
                 refused to accept are available in the market,
                 compensation shall be determined on the basis of the
                 difference between the price of the goods specified in
                 the contract and the market or prevalent price of the
                 goods,

           (c)   If the seller does not deliver or refuses to deliver the
                 goods according to the contract for the sale of goods,
                 the buyer may claim compensation from the seller for
                 his or her failure to deliver the goods,

           (d)   While determining compensation under clause (c), if
                 the goods which the seller has refused or failed to
                 deliver to the buyer are available in the market,



                                  315
                  compensation shall be determined on the basis of
                  difference between the price of the goods specified in
                  the contract and the market or prevalent price of the
                  goods.

562. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.




                                   316
                               Chapter-7

           Provisions Relating to Contracts of Guarantee

563. Contract of guarantee deemed to be made: (1) If a contract is
     concluded under which a third party undertakes to repay the loan
     borrowed by or discharge the liability promised by a person in case
     of that person's default, a contract of guarantee shall be deemed to
     be concluded.

           (2)    If a third party gives the guarantee pursuant to sub-
     section (1) and the person bound to repay the loan or discharge the
     liability fails to repay or discharge such loan or liability, the person
     giving the guarantee (the surety) to such loan or liability shall repay
     the loan or discharge the liability according to the terms and
     conditions of the contract.

           (3)    The terms and conditions of guarantee shall be as
     determined in the contract.

           (4)    A contract of guarantee shall be made in written form.

564. Surety's obligation: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in the
     contract, the surety's obligation shall be as follows:

           (a)    Obligation of the surety shall arise at the time when the
                  debtor fails to discharge the obligation to be discharged
                  by him or her.

           (b)    Obligation of the surety shall be the same as the
                  obligation of the debtor who has to repay the loan or
                  discharge the obligation, and the surety shall remain



                                    317
             liable until the debtor becomes free from the obligation
             to repay or discharge.

       (c)   Obligation of the surety shall not be discharged merely
             because the principal debtor becomes free from the
             obligation by operation of law.

       (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if both security and guarantee have been given for any loan or
obligation, the surety shall not be liable to the extent covered by the
security so provided.

       (3)   A contract of guarantee shall be effective immediately
when the principal debtor breaches the obligation of repayment or
discharging liability to the creditor, and the creditor may cause the
surety to discharge such liability.

       Explanation: For the purposes of this Part, the term
“creditor” means a person who has lent a loan, and also includes a
person who is entitled to obtain any benefit from, or have any act
done, by the person who is bound to repay the loan or discharge the
liability.

       (4)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
the creditor shall give a notice to the principal debtor to perform the
contract according to its terms and conditions before claiming the
surety under the contract of guarantee for the repayment of the
amount not paid or discharge of the liability not discharged
according to the contract.




                               318
565. When surety is in discharge from obligation: (1) Except as
     otherwise provided for in the contract, the surety shall be in
     discharge of his or her obligation to the following extent, in any of
     the following circumstances:

           (a)   If the principal debtor so alters the terms and
                 conditions of the contract without the surety's consent
                 as to have substantial impact on the contract, in respect
                 of the transactions subsequent to the alteration,

           (b)   If a contract is concluded to discharge the principal
                 debtor from the obligation for which the guarantee was
                 given,

           (c)   If the principal debtor is discharged from the obligation
                 by an act or action of the creditor or the loan is written
                 off,

           (d)   If the creditor agrees to discharge the debtor from the
                 liability by recovering a sum less than that is due or to
                 give additional time for repaying the loan or not to
                 institute a lawsuit,

           (e)   If any act or action by the creditor causes an adverse
                 impact to the surety's right to legal remedy against the
                 principal debtor,

           (f)   If the creditor loses, damages any security obtained by
                 him or her from the principal debtor or returns it to the
                 principal debtor, to the extent of the value of such
                 security,


                                     319
           (g)     To the extent to which the principal debtor has repaid
                   the loan or discharged the obligation to the creditor
                   according to the contract.

           (2)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the surety shall not be deemed to be in discharge of obligation,
     except as otherwise provided in the contract, merely because the
     creditor fails to institute legal action against the surety or attempt to
     recover the amount to be recovered by him or her in time.

           (3)     If there are two or more sureties and the creditor
     discharges one co-surety from obligation, the other co-sureties shall
     not be discharged from their respective part of obligation.

           (4)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
     if the part of the co-sureties' obligation cannot be separated, no co-
     surety shall be deemed to be in discharge of his or her obligation
     even though the creditor has discharged him or her from the
     obligation.

           (5)     Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
     surety shall not be in discharge of obligation under the contract of
     guarantee merely because there arises a dispute between the parties
     in relation to the contract creating the obligation for the discharge
     of which the contract of guarantee is made.

566. Relation between the surety and the principal debtor: (1) The
     surety shall cause the principal debtor to repay the loan or discharge
     the obligation according to the contract.




                                    320
            (2)    If the principal debtor has given any property or
      security to the surety for the guarantee given by him or her while
      borrowing a loan or promising the obligation, the surety shall not
      pledge, mortgage, sell or otherwise transfer the title to such
      property or security without the consent of the principal debtor.

            (3)    If a guarantee is given for any loan or obligation
      borrowed or promised for any specific purpose, the object, nature or
      terms and conditions of that loan or obligation shall not be altered
      without the consent of the surety.

            (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if the contract otherwise provides in relation to the surety
      and the principal debtor, such provision shall be applicable.

567. Surety to substitute creditor: (1) After the surety has, on behalf of
      the principal debtor, repaid the loan to be repaid or discharged the
      obligation to be discharged to the creditor under the contract, the
      surety shall substitute the creditor in relation to such loan or
      obligation, and, as the creditor, be entitled to recover the loan from,
      or institute legal action against, the principal debtor.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Chapter, the principal debtor shall pay to the surety the sum of loan
      repaid by the surety or all amounts in consideration for the
      obligation performed by the surety on behalf of the principal debtor,
      as well as interest or any other fee or amount chargeable thereon.

            (3)    If it becomes necessary to institute legal action because
      of the default of the principal debtor to pay the amount payable by


                                     321
      him or her under sub-section (2) or if any other expenses need to be
      incurred in this regard, the surety shall be entitled to recover also
      such expenses from the principal debtor.

568. When contract of guarantee can be voided: In any of the
      following circumstances, the surety may have the contract of
      guarantee voided:

            (a)    If the guarantee is obtained by the creditor or by any
                   other person with his or her consent by supplying
                   misleading or false notice or information to the surety
                   about the matter of the transaction for which the
                   guarantee is given,

            (b)    If the matter of guarantee, property or fact is concealed
                   or not disclosed,

            (c)    If the contract is concluded on the condition that a third
                   person will also become the surety but the third person
                   does not consent to give the guarantee.

569. Obligation of sureties to be equal: (1) If two or more persons give
      the guarantee jointly or severally for any loan or obligation and the
      principal debtor fails to repay the loan or discharge the obligation,
      the co-sureties shall repay the loan or discharge the obligation or
      perform the contract on an equal basis, except as otherwise
      provided for in the contract.

            (2)    If, while giving the guarantee jointly pursuant to sub-
      section (1), the co-sureties guarantee different parts, every surety




                                       322
     shall be liable to pay or bear the obligation only to the extent of the
     respective part guaranteed by him or her.

570. Continuous guarantee: (1) A guarantee which is so given as to
     extend to a series of transactions shall be deemed to be a continuous
     guarantee.

           (2)    If the provision of a guarantee referred to in sub-
     section (1) is made, the surety shall be liable to the extent of the
     amount of guarantee that could not be recovered in the entire period
     of the contract of guarantee irrespective of the number of
     transactions made thereunder.

           (3)    The surety may, by giving a notice to the creditor at
     least three months in advance, revoke the continuous guarantee as
     to the future transactions.

           (4)    Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if the
     surety dies, the continuous guarantee shall be deemed to be ipso
     facto revoked.

571. Contract of indemnity deemed to be concluded: (1) If a contract
     is concluded by which one party to the contract promises to save
     the other from loss or damage caused to him or her by the conduct
     of the promisor himself or herself or by the conduct of any other
     person working under the direction of such a party or loss or
     damage caused to such a party or third party by his or her conduct,
     the contract shall deemed to be a contract of indemnity.




                                   323
           (2)         If a contract referred to in sub-section (1) is concluded,
     the indemnity holder shall be entitled to recover as compensation
     all or any of the following amounts, subject to that contract:

                 (a) The amount of indemnity specified in the contract,

                 (b)     If any loss or damage is caused to a third person, the
                        amount to be paid to or borne therefor,

                 (c) All costs paid in any suit, if any, filed or defended by
                        him or her in connection with the contract of
                        indemnity,

                 (d) The costs involved in any suit compelled to be made
                        due to failure to pay the amounts referred to in clause
                        (a), (b) or (c).

           (3)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
     if the other party or third party suffers any loss or damage due to
     any act done by any person under the direction of such a party when
     such an act is done knowingly or recklessly by that person, with the
     intention of causing such loss or damage, such a person shall
     personally be liable for such loss or damage.

572. Provisions relating to subrogation: (1) If any person concludes a
     contract with another person against any possible loss or damage
     that could be caused by a third person to his or her property, facility
     or right enjoyed by him or her or benefit that could result from his
     or her business, the person concluding such a contract shall be
     liable for such loss or damage irrespective of the person causing
     such loss or damage.


                                           324
           Provided that if a contract is concluded to recover such loss
     or damage from any other person, it shall be recovered from such
     other person.

           (2)     The amount or compensation, if any, specified in the
     contract for any loss or damage suffered pursuant to sub-section (1)
     and   a     reasonable   amount      or   compensation,   failing   such
     specification, shall be paid, or caused to be paid, immediately to the
     person affected by the loss or damage or to his or her successor if
     he or she is dead.

           (3)     If any loss or damage is suffered pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the person paying the amount or compensation referred
     to in sub-section (2) shall be deemed to have subrogated the person
     who has sustained such loss or damage, and accordingly, the
     subrogator shall be entitled to the recovery of the amount or
     compensation for such loss or damage from the person causing such
     loss or damage.

573. Rights of subrogator: The rights and obligation of the subrogator
     shall be as specified in the contract, and, failing such specification,
     shall be as follows:

           (a)     All the rights, under the contract, of the person who
                   has sustained the loss or damage shall devolve on the
                   subrogator,

           (b)     The subrogator under clause (a) may recover from the
                   person who has caused the loss or damage, or from the
                   party to a contract concluded in that respect, if any, the


                                    325
                  amount or reasonable compensation paid by him or her
                  to the person who has suffered the loss or damage, as
                  well as the costs incurred in having recourse to legal
                  remedies, if any.

574. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may file a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.




                                      326
                                Chapter-8

             Provisions Relating to Contracts of Bailment

575. Contract of bailment: (1) If a person so delivers any goods to
      another person that the goods shall be returned to him or her or
      handed over or sold to any other person according his or her
      direction, a contract of bailment shall be deemed to have been
      concluded.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      “goods” means any movable property and right in such property,
      other than currency in circulation.

            (2)    In concluding a contract pursuant to sub-section (1), a
      deed shall be executed while bailing any property the price of
      which exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees.

576. Bailment deemed to be completed: (1) The process of bailment
      shall be deemed to be completed once the bailee takes the delivery
      of the goods under bailment.

            (2)    If any person or any one authorized by him or her has
      already taken any goods in custody or possession, such goods shall
      be deemed to have been held as bailment.

577. To disclose faults in goods bailed: (1) The bailor shall disclose to
      the bailee any fault in the goods bailed of which the bailor is aware
      and which interferes with the use of them or can cause any loss or
      damage to the bailee or warrants separate provision or arrangement
      for their protection.

             (2)   If the bailor does not make such disclosure knowingly
      as required to be made pursuant to sub-section (1), to the bailee the

                                     327
     bailor shall be liable for any loss or damage arising from such
     goods or such non-disclosure.

           (3)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
     if the goods are bailed for hire, the bailor shall be responsible for any

     loss or damage resulted from any faults in such goods even if the
     bailor was not aware of the existence of such faults in such goods.

578. Obligations of bailee: (1) The bailee shall, take care of
     (herbichar)        and protect the goods bailed to him or her in
     accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the contract
     and, reasonable care of goods, as his or her own in the absence of
     such terms and conditions.

           (2)     Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if any
     goods bailed are lost, stolen, damaged, depreciated, deteriorated or
     destroyed because of a disaster in spite of the reasonable care and
     protection pursuant to sub-section (1), the bailee shall not be liable
     to return such goods.

           Provided that if the goods are lost, stolen, damaged,
     depreciated, deteriorated or destroyed because of recklessness or
     mala fide intention of the bailee or of his or her failure to take care
     of or protect the goods according to the terms and conditions of the
     contract, the bailee shall be liable to return the goods or pay an
     amount equivalent to the price thereof to the bailor.

           (3)     If    the   bailee    uses   the   bailed   goods   without
     authorization to do so under, or in a manner contrary to the terms
     and conditions of, the contract, the bailee shall pay compensation to




                                        328
     the bailor for any damage, loss, destruction or deterioration arising
     to the goods from such use.

           (4)    Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
     bailee shall not mix the bailor's goods with his or her own goods.

           Provided that if the bailee, with the consent of the bailor,
     mixes the goods of the bailor with his or her own goods, both
     parties shall have an interest, in proportion to their respective share,
     in the mixture thus produced and income accrued therefrom.

           (5)    If the bailee, without consent of the bailor, mixes the
     goods of the bailor with his or her own goods, and the goods so
     mixed can be separated, the title of the property in goods shall
     remain in the parties respectively, but the bailee shall be bound to
     bear the expenses for separation and the damage, if any, arising to
     the bailor from the mixture.

           (6)    If the bailee, without consent of the bailor, mixes the
     goods of the bailor with his or her own goods, and the goods so
     mixed cannot be separated pursuant to sub-section (5), the bailor
     shall have right in such goods.

579. To return bailed goods: (1) The bailee shall return the bailed
     goods to the bailor after the expiry of the period specified at the
     time of bailment of the goods or after the accomplishment of the
     purpose for which the goods were bailed.

           (2)    If the bailee does not return the goods within the period
     specified for retuning them pursuant to sub-section (1) or within a
     reasonable period according to the nature of the goods failing such
     specified period or if the bailor refuses to take the goods back


                                    329
      within such a period and if the goods are lost, stolen, damaged,
      destroyed or deteriorated or any loss or damage is caused to the
      bailor due to such goods from that date, the respective party shall be
      liable for the loss or damage arising from his or her own default.

               (3)   Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, in the
      case of bailment of the goods owned by more than one person, the
      bailee may return the goods to any one of the joint owners, or to the
      person assigned by them, and if the goods are so returned, the
      goods shall be deemed to have been duly returned.

               (4)   If the bailee does not hold the goods bailed to him or
      her in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract, the
      bailor may take back the goods at any time.

               (5)   Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
      goods increased or earned from the bailed goods, shall also belong
      to the bailor.

580. Bailor to be liable for other's goods bailed: If the bailor bails any
      goods in which he or she has no title, right or ownership to the
      bailee and the bailee is compelled to bear any claim or loss or
      damage to a third party from such bailment or bear any costs in
      relation to the bailment, the bailor shall also be liable to pay such
      costs.

581. Goods given for repair and maintenance to be returned: (1) If
      any goods are delivered to a person for their repair, improvement or
      renovation in any manner, the person shall repair, improve and
      renovate those goods and return them to the concerned owner, upon
      charging the costs or service charge for such repair, improvement or



                                     330
      renovation within the period specified in the contract. If the goods
      are not so returned within the specified period or any additional loss
      or damage is caused to the goods or the goods are so damaged as to
      be unusable in the course of their repair, improvement or renovation,
      that person shall be liable to pay the compensation specified in the
      contract and, failing such provision, a reasonable compensation to
      the concerned owner.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      the person who repairs, improves or renovates the goods shall have
      the right to retain them until the payment of the costs incurred in
      the repair, improvement or renovation of such goods or the service
      charge if paid, and if such costs or service fee are not paid within a
      reasonable period, that person may recover the costs or service fee
      by selling the goods.

582. Costs incurred in taking care of (herbichar)             bailed goods:
      Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the bailor shall
      bear the expenses incurred in the bailment of goods and in the care
      or security of the bailed goods.

583. Contract of bailment to be void: If it is proved that any goods are
      bailed with the intention of disentitling partition share, abstaining
      from paying any payable government fee or amount payable to any
      one or for any other illegal purpose, such a contract of bailment
      shall be void.

584. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from an act done
      or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within two
      years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.



                                     331
                                Chapter-9

             Provisions Relating to Collateral or Deposit

585. Contract of pledge or deposit deemed to be made: (1) If a person
     takes delivery of goods as security for payment of a debt lent to
     another person, a contract of collateral is deemed to have been
     concluded and if a person takes delivery of goods as a security for
     the performance of a promise by another person, a contract of
     deposit shall be deemed to have been concluded.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     “goods” means any property and includes title to or an instrument
     establishing title to that property.

           (2)    A contract of collateral or deposit may be made
     pursuant to sub-section (1) in relation to the debt for the payment of
     which security is taken and interest of the debt, and if a deposit is
     taken as a security for the performance of a promise, other expenses
     related to that promise and expenses incurred in the care of
     (herchaha)collateraled or deposited goods.

586. To return goods collateraled or deposited: (1) Except as
     otherwise provided for in the contract, after the payment of the debt
     for which the collater has been taken or after the performance of the
     promise for which person deposit has been taken shall be returned
     to the concerned.

           (2)    If the collateral or deposit taken under sub-section (1)
     is or may be divided into different parts, the collateral or deposit
     may be returned to the extent covered by the respective portion of
     the debt repaid or the promise performed.


                                    332
587. Rights of the person who obtains collateral or deposit: (1) If a
     debt has been taken having pledged any goods as a collateral for its
     payment and makes a default in payment of the debt or interest of
     the debt, if any, within the specified period, the person who has
     taken the collateral may initiate the right to take legal action to
     recover the debt in accordance with law, by selling or auctioning
     the collateral so given at the prevailing market price or transfer the
     ownership of such security in his or her name subject to law, if such
     sale or auction cannot be made.

           (2)   If the goods pledged as collateral are sold at a price
     lesser than the amount recoverable by the person who has taken the
     collateral from the borrower under sub-section (1), such a person
     shall be entitled to recover the shortfall amount from the other
     assets of the borrower, and the collateral is sold at a price higher
     than the amount to be recovered, the excess amount shall be
     returned to the borrower.

           (3)   Notwithstanding anything containing in sub-sections
     (1) and (2), the person who has given the goods as collateral may
     take back his or her goods at any time by paying the debt and
     interest thereon and other amounts, if any, due and payable prior to
     the sale of the pledged goods or the transfer of ownership thereof.

           Provided that the person who has given the collateral shall
     also be liable to bear additional liability arising to the goods
     pledged from his or her failure to pay the amount within the
     specified period.

           (4)   If a deposit is taken as a security for the performance
     of a promise and the promise is not performed or completed within

                                   333
     the specified time, the goods pledged as deposit may be used for the
     performance of the promise or the expenses incurred in such
     performance may be recovered from such goods.

           (5)    If the promise cannot be performed from the goods
     pledged as deposit, such shortfall amount may be recovered from
     the other assets of the borrower.

588. Consequences of pledge or deposit of goods by non-owner: (1) If
     anyone borrows a debt or enters into a promise by pledging to the
     creditor any goods in which the he or she has no right or ownership
     or which has been obtained under a contract which is void under
     this Part and the pledgee does not know that fact, the pledgee shall
     have the right to demand the borrower giving such a collateral or
     deposit to give collateral or deposit of the goods owned by him or
     her equal to that amount, and if the he or she fails to give the
     collateral or deposit so demanded, the pledgee shall have the right
     to get the contract voided.

           (2)    If any goods obtained under a void contract are
     pledged as a collateral or deposit and the contract has already
     become void before giving such collateral or deposit or the pledgee
     had the knowledge that the goods pledged as the collateral or
     deposit did not belong to the pledger, the pledgee shall have no
     right in such goods and may recover the amount to be recovered by
     him or her or have the promise performed from other goods
     belonging to the pledger.

           (3)    If the pledger has a partial or limited title to, or
     ownership of, the goods pledged as the collateral or deposit, the



                                   334
     pledgee also shall have right and title to such goods to that extent
     only.

589. Creditors to be on equal footing (pari pasu): (1) If a person has
     borrowed debt from two or more creditors at a time or several times
     by pledging any of his or her goods as a collateral and the goods so
     pledged as the collateral are not sufficient to pay the debt of all the
     creditors, except as otherwise provided for in the contract, all the
     creditors who have taken the goods as collateral shall be deemed to
     be in pari pasu in respect of the debt outstanding and shall have the
     right to make a proportionate claim on the goods accordingly.

             (2)   A contract entered into giving priority right in the
     future to a creditor on the goods already pledged as collateral
     pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be void. If a creditor has already
     recovered his or her debt from such a collateral before the contract
     becomes void in spite of knowing that there are also other creditors
     in respect of the security, such a creditor shall return the amount to
     other creditors and recover his or her debt from other assets of the
     pledger.

590. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.




                                   335
                              Chapter-10

             Provisions Relating to Contracts of Agency

591. Contract of agency deemed to be made: Any person may appoint
     any other person as his or her agent to do any act on his or her
     behalf, except on the matter of his or her personal ability, to
     conduct business as his or her agent or carry on any transaction
     with a third person on his or her behalf or to represent him or her to
     such a person or to establish any type of legal relation with the
     person appointing an agent (the principal) and a third person, and if
     an agent is so appointed, a contract of agency shall be deemed to
     have been concluded.

592. Recognition of transaction carried out by agent: (1) Whatever a
     person can do on his or her own, the person may get the same done,
     or cause to be done, through an agent, subject to the law.

           Provided that no act may be done through an agent for which
     one has to be present in person.

           (2)    A contract concluded through an agent appointed
     pursuant to Section 591 or act done by the agent shall be deemed to
     have been carried out by the concerned person and the obligation
     arising out of such an act shall be performed as if the contract were
     concluded or act done by the principal.

           Provided that if the agent has done any act beyond his or her
     authority, the principal shall not be liable for such an act other than
     that accepted by him or her.




                                    336
            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if, out of the acts done beyond authority, some acts are within his or
      her authority and some are beyond it and the part done within his or
      her authority can be separated, the principal shall be liable to the
      extent of the acts done within authority.

593. Power to appoint sub-agent: (1) If it is necessary to appoint a sub-
      agent according to the nature of any trade, business or transaction
      or a sub-agent may be appointed having regard to the provision of
      the contract or usage of the contract of agency, the agent may,
      except as otherwise provided for in the contract, appoint a sub-
      agent with the consent of the principal.

            Provided that an agent who has been appointed on the
      condition that he or she shall represent or do any act personally may
      not appoint a sub-agent.

            (2)    If a sub-agent is appointed pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the agent shall give information thereof to the principal, and the
      rights and obligations of the sub-agent so appointed shall be the
      same as that of the agent appointed by the principal.

            (3)    If an agent appoints a sub-agent without the consent of
      the principal, the principal shall not be liable for any act done or
      action taken by the sub-agent.

            (4)    The agent appointing the sub-agent shall be personally
      liable for the acts referred to in sub-section (3).




                                     337
594. matters to be complied with by agent: (1) Except as otherwise
     provided for in the contract, an agent shall comply with the
     following matters:

           (a)   To act subject to the terms and conditions of the
                 contract of agency and the directions given by the
                 principal,

           (b)   In the absence of any terms and conditions in the
                 contract or any direction given by the principal, to do
                 the business of agency in good faith, with full diligence
                 and necessary care and skill, accordance to the nature
                 of the act and business assigned to him or her and the
                 laws and usages of the place of transaction,

                          Provided that if, at the time of the conclusion of
                 the contract, the principal was aware that the agent has
                 no efficiency or capacity in relation to any matter, the
                 agent shall not be liable for any loss or damage
                 resulting from such inefficiency or incapacity of him or
                 her.

           (c)   On the removal from an agent, not to do any act as
                 usual in the capacity of an agent on the same business.

           (d)   To render or show the details of accounts and records
                 of the agency business to the principal at the time of
                 demand,

           (e)   In the case of any obstruction, obstacle or difficulty
                 arising in the course of business of the agency, to


                                    338
                    notify the principal as soon as possible and obtain
                    necessary directions, and the principal shall be liable
                    for any act done according to the direction so given.

           (2)      If the principal suffers any loss or damage because of
     the failure of the agent to perform his or her duties under clauses (a),
     (b) and (c) of sub-section (1), the agent shall personally bear such
     loss or damage.

595. Agent to be responsible: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
     the contract, the agent shall, in any of the following circumstances,
     be personally liable for the transaction done by him or her on behalf
     of the principal:

                 (a) If the agent concludes a contract with a third party in
                     relation to any transaction with provision for personal
                     responsibility,

                 (b) If any act is done for or on behalf of an undisclosed
                     principal and such a principal is not disclosed,

                 (c) If the principal cannot be sued for any reason,

                 (d) If the contract is concluded in his or her own name,

                 (e) If any act is done beyond the scope of the contract of
                     agency or authority,

                 (f) If any misrepresentation or fraud is committed in the
                     course of the transaction,

                 (g) If the agent is required to be liable personally
                     according to the nature of the trade,


                                       339
                 (h) If the interest of the agent is also involved in the
                     transaction.

           (2)     Except as otherwise provided for in the contract
     between the agent and a third person, nothing shall be deemed to
     bar the making of any claim by the third person against the
     principal merely by the reason that the agent is personally liable
     pursuant to sub-section (1), and legal action may also be taken
     against the principal for a sum not recovered from the agent.

           (3)     For the purposes of taking a legal action against the
     principal pursuant to sub-section (2), the statute of limitation shall
     be deemed to commence from the date of the last payment made by
     the agent.

596. Principal to be liable when leading to believe that act is done
     with authority: (1) If the principal gives information to a third
     party that he or she has given authority to another person to act on
     his or her behalf or leads the third party to so believe, the principal
     shall be liable for any act done by the agent on his or her behalf
     unless the third party has come to know or has reasonable ground to
     know that the authority has not been so given.

           (2)     In the cases referred to in sub-section (1), the principal
     may be liable even for the act done by the agent beyond the
     authority if there is a reasonable ground for the third party to
     believe that the agent has authority.




                                    340
597. Termination of agency: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
     the contract, the agency shall be deemed to be terminated ipso facto,
     in any of the following circumstances:

                 (a)      If the agent voluntarily renounces the agency and
                          gives a notice thereof to the principal,

                 (b)      If the principal revokes the authority given to the
                          agency or the contract of agency or gives a notice to
                          the agent on the impossibility of performance of the
                          contract,

                 (c)      If the agent is appointed for any specific business
                          and that business is completed,

                 (d)      If the agent is appointed for a specific period and
                          that period expires,

                 (e)      If the principal or the agent dies or becomes of
                          unsound mind,

                 (f)      If the principal is declared to be insolvent,

                 (g)      If the matter for which the agent is appointed no
                          longer exists,

                 (h)      If an agent is appointed by a body corporate and
                          such a body is liquidated or dissolved.

           (2)         The principal may revoke any or whole of the authority
     given to the agent at any time before the agent exercises the
     authority, and if the authority is so revoked, the principal shall
     immediately give a notice thereof to the agent.


                                           341
           Provided that if the agent has already exercised some of such
     authority, the authority shall not be deemed to have been revoked in
     relation to the act already done in exercise of the authority

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if the agent also has a share in the property connected with
     the main business of the agency, the agent may not be removed in
     such manner as to be prejudicial to such share.

598. Agent may not be removed: (1) Except as otherwise provided in
     the contract, if an agent is appointed for any specific period or act,
     the principal shall not remove the agent before the expiry of that
     period or before the completion of that act, except for a reasonable
     and sufficient reason.

           (2)    An agent who is appointed without specifying any
     certain period or act shall not be removed without giving a prior
     notice along with an appropriate reason.

           (3)    If the principal removes the agent in contravention of
     sub-section (1) or (2), the principal shall pay a reasonable
     compensation to the agent.

599. Renunciation      of     agency     by   agent    not   allowed:   (1)
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
     except as otherwise provided for in the contract, an agent appointed
     for a specific period or act shall not renounce the agency before the
     expiry of, or completion of, such period or act, except for a
     reasonable and sufficient reason.




                                   342
           (2)    Any agent appointed without specifying any period or
     act under sub-section (1) shall not renounce the agency without
     giving a prior notice along with the reason for such renunciation to
     the principal.

           (3)    If any agent renounces the agency in contravention of
     sub-section (1) or (2), the principal may claim a reasonable
     compensation.

600. Removal of sub-agent together with agent: If an agent ceases to
     exist under this Part, the sub-agent appointed by him or her shall
     also be deemed to have, ipso facto, been removed.
601. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved form any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.




                                   343
                               Chapter-11

        Provisions Relating to Contracts for Carriage of Goods

602. Contract for carriage of goods deemed to be made: (1) If a
      contract is concluded for the carriage of any goods from one place
      to another, a contract for the carriage of goods shall be deemed to
      have been concluded.

            (2)    Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, a
      receipt or bill to be issued by the carrier to the owner of goods at
      the time of handing over the goods for carriage shall be recognized
      as an evidence of the contract concluded between the carrier and the
      owner of the goods.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      “carrier” means a person operating a transport service other than air
      or marine transport, or a person engaged in the business of such
      transport, and also includes a person operating the business of
      carriage through internal navigation transport, rope-way or animal
      or any other means.

            Provided that if any person employed by the owner of goods
      on wage basis or his or her agent or a person working under his or
      her supervision carries goods, such a person shall not be deemed to
      be a carrier for the purposes of this Chapter.

603. Carrier’s obligations: (1) It shall be the obligation of the carrier to
      carry the goods received from the owner of the goods for carriage
      to the specified destination in proper condition.

            (2)    If the goods received from the owner of the goods for
      carriage are lost, destroyed, broken, defaced or damaged or the


                                    344
     goods do not reach to the specified destination in proper condition
     in any other manner, the carrier shall be liable for that.

            (3)   The carrier shall carry the goods within the time
     specified in the contract, and within a reasonable time, if no period
     for transporting the goods is specified in the contract, and deliver
     the goods to the owner of the goods or his or her agent or a person
     designated by him or her.

604. Carrier to be liable: (1) If more than one carrier or mode of
     transport is involved in the carriage of any goods, except as
     otherwise provided for in the contract, the carrier to whom the
     owner of the goods has been handed over the goods shall be liable.

            (2)   If any goods are stolen, lost, damaged or destroyed
     prior to the carriage and delivery of such goods by the carrier to the
     concerned person, the carrier shall be liable for that.

            Provided that if the goods are stolen, lost, damaged or
     destroyed due to a disaster or accident, the carrier shall not be liable
     for that.

605. Right to sell goods without consent of owner: (1) If the carrier
     fails to carry any goods to the destination within the specified time
     due to a disaster or accident in the course of carriage of the goods
     and such goods are perishable or their price or quality is susceptible
     to decrease significantly, the carrier may sell such goods even
     without the consent of the owner.

            (2)   The carrier shall pay the amount so obtained from the
     sale made pursuant to sub-section (1) to the owner.




                                    345
606. Carrier’s liability to be limited: (1) Except where the owner of
     goods or his or her agent has clearly declared at the time of
     conclusion of the contract that the value of the goods to be carried
     is more or except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
     compensation for any loss or damage to the goods carried by the
     carrier shall not exceed one hundred thousand rupees.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the carrier shall not be liable for any loss or damage to any gold,
     silver, diamond, jewelry or articles made thereof, precious stone,
     bill of exchange, security, document registered at office, certificate
     issued by an academic and other institute, coin, bank note, postal
     stamp, fish, meat, fresh fruits and vegetable, insecticide and toxic
     material, inflammable material, petroleum product, precious fine art
     work, idol, curio goods or glass or goods made of glass or highly
     breakable or fragile goods, wildlife and domestic animal, handicraft
     product, arms and ammunition, explosive, electronic equipment
     (radio, television, computer, mobile or similar other good) and their
     spare parts, machinery and such goods as specified by the law to be
     declared by the owner before the carriage, except where the owner
     or his or her agent has made explicit declaration at the time of the
     conclusion of contract or at the time of handing over of the goods to
     the carrier for carriage.

           (3)    For the purpose of bearing the risks involved in the
     carriage of goods under sub-section (2), the carrier may insure the
     goods through the owner of the goods or his or her agent or insure
     the goods by himself or herself having charged separate fee to the




                                   346
     owner or the carrier may make other necessary provisions for
     preventing the risks.

607. To bear compensation: The carrier shall, for such loss, damage or
     harm as caused to the goods declared at the time of the conclusion
     of contract or at the time of handing over the goods to the carrier
     for carriage under this Chapter or the goods not requiring
     declaration, in the course of their carriage, be liable to pay to the
     owner the compensation, if any, specified in the contract, to
     reimburse for the goods carried with the consent of the owner if no
     such compensation is specified in the contract or failing such
     consent, the prevailing price of such goods, and failing the
     determination of the price, a reasonable price and also a reasonable
     compensation for the loss and damage caused to the owner of the
     goods, subject to Chapter-5 of this Part.

608. Termination of carrier's liability: Except as otherwise provided
     for in the contract, the carrier's liability shall be deemed to have
     been terminated in any of the following circumstances:

           (a)    If the carrier or his or her agent carries and hands over
                  the goods to the owner of the goods or his or her agent
                  or the person designated by him or her,

           (b)    If the goods handed over to the carrier are taken back
                  by the owner of the goods or his or her agent prior to
                  the carriage thereof,

           (c)    If the carrier or his or her agent returns the goods to the
                  owner of the goods or his or her agent specifying the
                  reason that the goods cannot be carried within the



                                   347
                  specified time because of the circumstance referred to
                  in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 531.

609. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.




                                   348
                                 Chapter-12

                 Provisions Relating to Contracts of Lease

610. A contract of lease deemed to be made: (1) If a contract is
     concluded under which a person gives any goods in which he or she
     has right and possession to another person for use and possession
     and enjoy the benefits accrued therefrom in consideration for a rent
     payable regularly for a certain period, a contract of lease shall be
     deemed to be concluded.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     “goods" means any property from which benefit may be acquired
     through consumption, possession or use without diminishing them.

           (2)      If a contract of lease is concluded pursuant to sub-
     section (1), except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
     lessor shall ensure the lessee of the following matters:

           (a)      To transfer certain goods for use and possession
                    according to the contract,

           (b)      To maintain the goods transferred pursuant to clause
                    (a) in a running condition so that they may be
                    possessed or used at the time of the transfer,

           (c)      To make arrangements so that the goods transferred
                    pursuant to clause (a) or (b) can be possessed or used
                    peacefully and without any hindrance.

           (3)      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, any goods destroyable in use or consumable goods may not
     be leased.



                                     349
611. Form of the leased goods not to be changed: The lessee shall not
     change the original form of the leased goods without the consent of
     the owner during the period of the contract of lease.

           Provided that nothing contained in this Section shall prevent
     the repairing, maintaining, improving or renovating of the leased
     goods.

612. To use the leased goods in good faith: (1) The lessee shall have
     the right to possess and use the leased goods in good faith and in a
     prudential manner as if the goods were owned by himself or herself.

           (2)   While possessing and using the leased goods pursuant
     to sub-section (1), the lessee shall possess and use them in
     consonance with the object of the contract of lease.

           (3)   If the lessee is proved to have possessed and used the
     leased goods contrary to sub-section (1) or (2), the lessor may
     terminate such a contract at any time.

613. To repair and maintain leased goods: (1) Except as otherwise
     provided for in the contract of lease, the lessor shall repair and
     maintain the leased goods.

           (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if the possession or use of the leased goods cannot be made without
     their immediate repair, maintenance or renovation, the lessee
     himself or herself may repair, maintain or renovate such goods by
     giving information thereof to the lessor.

           (3)   The lessor shall reimburse or adjust in lease rent the
     expenses incurred in the repair, maintenance or renovation made
     pursuant to sub-section (2).


                                    350
614. Lessor to be informed if goods are not usable: (1) If the leased
      goods or any part thereof are lost, damaged or destroyed in any
      manner, are not capable of being possessed or used for any reason,
      any person makes a claim or dispute of any kind in relation to such
      goods or any part thereof or any person creates hindrance or
      disturbance in any manner while possessing or using the goods, the
      lessee shall give information thereof to the lessor immediately.

            (2)   Upon receipt of information pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the lessor shall carry out such repair, maintenance or renovation or
      obtain such legal remedies as may be necessary to restore the goods
      into their original condition according to the nature of the goods
      within fifteen days.

            (3)    In the case of failure to restore the leased goods into
      their original condition within the period referred to in sub-section
      (2), the lease rent shall be subject to reduction in proportion to the
      extent to which such goods have been lost, damaged or destroyed or
      become incapable of being used or possessed or such claim,
      hindrance or dispute has been made.

615. Lessee to be liable: (1) The lessee shall possess or use the leased
      goods by taking adequate safety measures having regard to the
      nature of the goods in order to save the leased goods from loss or
      damage.

            (2)    If the leased goods are lost or destroyed for any reason
      or the price of the goods decreases due to loss or destruction thereof
      in any manner or due to loss because of negligence on the part of
      the lessee, any member of his or her family, his or her agent or the
      third party, during the validity of the contract of lease, the lessee

                                    351
      shall be liable therefor, and the lessee shall restore such goods into
      their original condition, and if the lessee fails to do so, he or she
      shall be liable to pay compensation therefor.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
      or (2), the lessee shall not be liable for the loss or damage, if any,
      caused to the leased goods due to any force majeure event.

            (4)    If partial loss or damage is caused to the leased goods
      due to a force majeure event pursuant to sub-section (3) and the
      lessor does not restore such goods into their original condition or
      such restoration is not possible, the lessor shall reduce the lease rent
      in proportion to the loss or damage.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
      "force majeure event" means any of the following events:

                   (a)   A storm, earthquake, eruption of volcano,

                   (b)   Excessive rain, flood, landslide, soil erosion,
                         thunder-storm,

                   (c)   Fire caused in any manner other than that caused
                         by dishonesty, negligence or recklessness on the
                         part of the lessee or his or her family member,
                         employee, worker or third party,

                   (d)   Act of terrorism, civil riot, civil war,

                   (e)   Other natural calamity of similar nature beyond
                         human control.

616. To pay lease rent: (1) The lessee shall pay to the lessor the lease
      rent according to the terms and conditions of the contract of lease.



                                     352
           (2)    If the terms and conditions of payment of the lease rent
     are not specified in the contract pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     lessee shall pay the lease rent on the next day of the end of each
     month, in the case of a movable property, within fifteen days of the
     end of every fiscal year, in the case of farmland, servitude, land
     leased for industrial or infrastructure building or housing, and
     within a week of the end of every month, in the case of other goods.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if any person does not let the lessee fully possess and use
     such goods or any part thereof by showing any defect in the
     ownership and possession of the leased goods or any part thereof,
     creating any type of hindrance or obstruction or making a claim in
     relation thereto, the lessee may reduce the lease rent in proportion
     thereto.

617. Validity period of contract of lease: (1) No contract of lease
     concluded in relation to the following goods shall remain valid for
     more than the following period:

                 (a)   Thirty-five years in the case of housing land
                       leased for the construction of a building or
                       housing land in use after construction of a
                       building therein,

                 (b)   Thirty-five years in the case of the land leased for
                       the purpose of servitude,

                 (c)   Forty years in the case of the land leased for the
                       purpose    of     construction,   development   and




                                   353
                      operation of the infrastructures such as industrial
                      structure, roads, canals, electricity generation,

                (d)   Twenty years in the case of land for farming;

                (e)   Nineteen years in the case of house and land
                      leased for the purposes other than that referred to
                      in clause (a), (b), (c) or (d),

                (f)   Fifteen years in the case of a motor vehicle,

                (g)   Fifteen years in the case of machinery equipment
                      other than a motor vehicle,

                (h)   Fifteen years in the case of machinery equipment
                      other than that referred to in clause (f) or (g),

                (i)   Ten years in the case of a domestic animal,

                (j)   Ten years in the case of goods other than that set
                      forth in this Section having regard to their life and
                      nature.

          (2)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the parties may extend the validity period of the contract of lease,
     subject to the validity period of the contract, before expiry of the
     period referred to in such a sub-section.

          (3)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
     the parties to a contract of lease may decide whether to extend the
     period of the contract of lease having regard to the place where the
     leased house and land are situated and the nature of the goods.

618. Leased goods may be sub-leased: (1) The lessee may, with the
     prior consent of the lessor, sub-lease to any person the goods or any


                                   354
     part thereof leased under the contract of lease, by concluding
     another contract of lease to that effect.

           (2)    The lessee shall not be free from his or her obligation
     towards the lessor for the reason that he or she has made a sub-lease
     pursuant to sub-section (1).

           (3)    The terms and conditions of such a sub-lease contract
     concluded pursuant to sub-section (1) in relation to the goods on
     sub-lease shall not be different than the terms and conditions of the
     first contract of lease.

           (4)    While determining the terms and conditions of the
     contract of lease pursuant to sub-section (3), provision may be so
     made that the sub-lessee shall be directly liable to the lessor in
     respect of the leased goods, and if such provision is made, the sub-
     lessee shall be liable to the lessor to the extent of the sub-lease
     contract.

           (5)    The validity period of the contract of lease made
     pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed the validity period of
     the contract of lease concluded between the lessor and the lessee.

           (6)    If the lessor makes recourse to any legal remedy or a
     claim against the lessee under this Chapter, the sub-lessee shall not
     be liable therefor except in the case referred to in sub-section (4).

           (7)    Nothing shall be deemed to have been prejudiced in
     any manner the right which the lessor may exercise under the
     contract of lease based on anything contained in this Section,.

619. To return leased goods: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
     the contract of lease, if the contract of lease is terminated for any


                                    355
     reason, the lessee shall return the goods leased under this Chapter to
     the lessor within thirty-five days of the termination of the contract
     of lease.

              Provided that, in the case of an immovable property, the
     lessor shall be deemed to be entitled, ipso facto, to possess that
     goods after thirty-five days of the termination of the contract of
     lease.

              (2)   The lessee shall return the goods leased pursuant to
     sub-section (1) to the lessor on the same condition as they were
     received at the time of lease.

              Provided that the lessee shall not be liable for any natural
     decay or depreciation caused from the possession and use of the
     goods.

              (3)   If a record of the goods or accessories and spare parts
     thereof has been maintained at the time of leasing the goods, the
     goods and accessories and spare parts thereof according to such
     record shall also be returned, while returning the leased goods
     pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2).

              Provided that the accessories or spare parts that get lost or
     destroyed in the course of possession and use according to the
     nature of the goods need not be returned.

620. Special provision relating to the contract of lease of immovable
     property: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Chapter, a contract of lease of any immovable property shall be
     concluded in writing.




                                      356
           (2)    While leasing any immovable property for a period of
     more than ten years, the contract of lease, setting out such matter,
     shall be registered in a body legally authorized for that purpose.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Chapter, no immovable property can, without consent of the
     Government of Nepal, be leased to a person who cannot acquire
     ownership in any immovable property in Nepal according to law,
     for the purpose of farming, constructing a building or housing and
     land development.

           (4)    In returning any building, shed or other structure built
     by the lessee, or the garden, forest or trees located, in the land
     leased under the contract of lease to the lessor upon the expiry of
     the validity period of the contract of lease, except as otherwise
     provided for in the contract, the lessee shall be deemed to have right
     and ownership in such building, shed or other structure or garden,
     forest or trees located therein, and the lessee shall accordingly
     remove such building, shed, structure, garden, forest or trees from
     such land.

           (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
     if the lessor desires to take such building, shed or other structure or
     garden, forest or trees located in such land on the as is where is
     basis, the lessor shall pay the mutually agreed price for the same.

621. Contract of lease may be terminated: (1) The lessor may
     terminate the contract of lease in any of the following
     circumstances:




                                   357
            (a) Except as otherwise permitted by the lessor, if the
                lessee fails to pay the lease amount until ninety days
                after the due date for the payment of the lease rent
                has expired,

            (b) If the lessee possesses or uses the leased goods taken
                contrary to Section 612,

            (c) If the lessee fails to give information to the lessor or
                keep him or her informed about the matters referred
                to in sub-section (1) of Section 614,

            (d) If the lessee fails to restore the leased goods into their
                original condition having regard to the nature of the
                goods pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 615,

            (e) If the goods leased are sub-leased without the prior
                consent of the lessor.

      (2)      The lessee may terminate the contract of lease in any
of following circumstances:

      (a)     If the leased goods cannot be possessed or used for the
              purpose or object for which the goods have been leased,

      (b)     If the lessor fails to reimburse the repair and
              maintenance costs or make its adjustment to the lease
              rent pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 613,

      (c)     If the lessor does not reduce or agree to reduce the
              lease rent amount pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section
              614 or sub-section (4) of Section 615.




                                358
622. Provisions relating to house rent to apply: Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in matters concerning
     house rent the provisions of Chapter-9 of Part 4 shall apply.

623. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.




                                   359
                              Chapter-13

          Provisions Relating to Hire-Purchase Contracts

624. Hire-purchase contract deemed to be made: (1) If a person lets
     any goods to another person for hire on the following terms and
     conditions, a hire-purchase contract shall be deemed to be
     concluded:

                  (a)   The hirer has the right of possession and use of
                        the goods let by the owner of the goods, on the
                        condition of payment of the rent amount by
                        installments in periodic basis for that goods,

                  (b)   The hirer has the right to purchase the goods on
                        hire according to the terms and conditions of the
                        contract,

                  (c)   The ownership of such goods would be
                        transferred to the hirer upon payment of the last
                        installment,

                  (d)   The hirer may terminate the contract at any time
                        prior to the transfer of ownership pursuant to
                        clause (c).

           (2)     The contract referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
     concluded in writing.

           (3)     The owner of the goods shall provide one copy of the
     contract concluded pursuant to this Section to the hirer free of cost
     as soon as the contract is so concluded.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-



                                      360
           (1)    "Goods" means any movable property that may be let
                  for hire for the purpose of its possession and use.

           (2)    "Hirer” means a person who takes any goods on hire
                  for possession and use according to the hire-purchase
                  contract and also includes his or her successor in the
                  event of his or her death or other third person to
                  receive such goods under the contract.

625. Matters to be specified in hire-purchase contract: (1) The
     following matters shall be specified in the hire-purchase contract
     referred to in Section 624:

                 (a)   The goods and short description thereof,

                 (b)   Hire-purchase price of the goods,

                 (c)   Cash price of the goods,

                 (d)   The date of commencement of the contract,

                 (e)   The amount of installment payable by the hirer to
                       the owner of goods and the number of installments,

                 (f)   The due date for payment of each installment and
                       the mode of payment,

                 (g)   The person and place for the payment of amount
                       pursuant to clause (f).

           (2)    If an installment can be paid by any mode other than
     cash pursuant to clause (f) of sub-section (1), a brief description
     thereof shall be specified in the hire-purchase contract.

           (3)    If a hire-purchase contract has been made without
     specifying any of the terms and conditions referred to in this


                                   361
     Section, the hirer may sue for the rescission of such contract, and if
     the court thinks that non-specification of any of such terms and
     conditions in the contract is detrimental to the hirer, the court may
     rescind such contract or issue any such other order as it thinks fit.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-

           (1)    "Hire purchase price" means the total amount to be paid
                  by the hirer to purchase or acquire the goods upon
                  payment of the full price of the goods, and also includes
                  an amount to be paid as deposit or down payment.

           (2)    "Cash price" means the price to be paid in cash by
                  which the hirer may purchase any goods.

626. Conclusion of more than one contract to be deemed as
     conclusion of single contract: (1) If several contracts are concluded
     in connection with the making of a hire-purchase contract, namely a
     contract between the hirer and the owner of any goods, a contract
     between a surety guaranteeing the payment of installments of the
     hire-purchase price of such goods or investor and the owner of such
     goods on the condition of entering into a hire-purchase contract, or in
     the case of any bailed or pledged goods, a contract between the
     bailor and the bailee of such goods, the contracts shall be deemed to
     be a single contract for the purposes of this Chapter.

           (2)    If the contracts referred to in sub-section (1) are
     concluded at different dates, the latest date shall be regarded as the
     date of the formation of the contract.

627. Consequences of formation of hire-purchase contract: (1)
     Notwithstanding anything contained in the contract, the following


                                   362
terms and conditions shall be deemed to be inherent in the hire-
purchase contract concluded between the parties:

            (a)   The hirer has the right of uninterrupted possession
                  and use of the hired goods,

            (b)   The goods are free from any type of charge or
                  claim of any one at the time of transfer of the
                  goods by the owner to the hirer,

            (c)   The owner of the goods has assured that the hirer
                  will have a reasonable opportunity to compare
                  such goods with the sample,

            (d)   The owner of the goods has the right to sell the
                  hired goods at the time of the transfer of such
                  goods by him to the hirer,

            (e)   The goods referred to in clause (a) are of
                  satisfactory quality at the time of the transfer of
                  goods,

            (f)   If the hirer has informed the owner of the goods
                  that he or she is hiring the goods for any particular
                  purpose, the owner of the goods guarantees that
                  such goods or quality thereof will be appropriate
                  for that purpose.

      (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of
sub-section (1), the owner of the goods shall not be liable for the
quality of the goods in any of the following circumstances:

            (a)   The owner of the goods was not aware of the
                  defect in the goods, for which the hire-purchase

                              363
                       contract has been made at the time of conclusion
                       of such contract,

                 (b)   The hire-purchase contract itself has a stipulation
                       about the defect in the quality of the goods,

                 (c)   If the hirer has collected and examined a sample
                       of the goods and the quality of the goods matches
                       with such a sample,

                 (d)   The hire-purchase contract is concluded with
                       regard to any second-hand goods and that matter is
                       specified in the contract.

           (3)    If the hirer takes any goods on hire on the basis of a
     sample, the owner of the goods shall be deemed to have assured of
     the fact that all of such goods match with the sample.

           (4)    If the description of any goods or quality thereof is
     specified in a contract concluded under this Chapter, the owner of
     the goods shall be deemed to have assured of the fact that such
     goods or quality thereof shall be as specified in the contract.

           Provided that if the sample is also specified in the contract,
     the matching of the quality of such goods with that of the sample
     shall not suffice, and it shall be matched with the description of the
     contract at the time of transferring the whole of the goods.

628. Transfer of ownership of goods: The ownership of the goods
     related to a hire-purchase contract shall be transferred to the hirer
     upon completion of the purchase according to the hire-purchase
     price determined in accordance with the contract concluded under
     this Chapter.


                                   364
            Provided that the right to possession and use shall be deemed
     to be created at the time of receiving such goods by him or her.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
     "completion of the purchase" means the payment of the last
     installment of the hire-purchase price.

629. Goods on hire to be cared (herchaha) and maintained: (1) The
     status of the goods hired under a hire-purchase contract shall be as of
     the bailment until the transfer of their ownership pursuant to Section
     628.

            (2)   Except as otherwise provided for in the hire-purchase
     contract, the hirer shall take reasonable care of (herbichar) and
     maintain the goods related to such a contract as if the goods were
     those owned by himself or herself.

            (3)   If such goods are lost or damaged because of the
     failure to take care of (herbichar) and maintain them pursuant to
     sub-section (2), the hirer shall be liable therefor.

630. Installment to be paid: The hirer shall pay the amount of
     installment as determined in the hire-purchase contract in
     consideration for the hired goods, within such period and according
     to such mode as specified in the contract.

631. Termination of contract by paying installment: (1) Except as
     otherwise provided for in the hire-purchase contract, the hirer may,
     during the currency of the contract, terminate the contract by
     making payment of the hire-purchase price of the goods or
     outstanding installment, and giving an advance written notice of at
     least fifteen days to the owner of the goods.


                                    365
           (2) While terminating the contract pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the hirer shall also be entitled to the discount of any kind, if any.

632. Termination of contract by returning goods: (1) Except as
     otherwise provided for in the contract, the hirer may, at any time
     prior to the payment of the last installment as determined according
     to the hire-purchase contract for the goods, terminate the contract by
     giving a written notice to the owner of goods at least fifteen days in
     advance.

           (2)    Prior to terminating the contract pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the hirer shall deliver or return the hired goods to the
     owner according to the hire-purchase contract and also pay the
     amount, if any, due and payable by the hirer to the owner under the
     contract on or before the termination of the contract.

           (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
     the hirer has already paid more than half of the hire purchase price
     on or before the termination of the hire-purchase contract, the hirer
     shall not be required to pay any more amount, and if the hirer has
     paid less than half the amount, the hirer shall pay up to the half of the
     amount.

           (4)    Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall be deemed to
     release the hirer from payment of such other amount, charge or due
     as may be payable according to the hire-purchase contract.

633. Right of hirer to transfer his or her right and interest: (1) The
     hirer may, with the consent of the owner of the hired goods, transfer
     to another person the right, interest or liability in the goods hired by
     him or her according to the hire-purchase contract and such other



                                     366
      right, interest or liability as may be accrued to him or her under such
      a contract.

             (2) The owner of goods shall, for the purposes of sub-section
      (1), give or refuse to give consent within fifteen days of the date of
      the written request made by the hirer with the intention of getting
      consent from the owner to transfer his or her right, interest or
      liability to another person, and if consent cannot be obtained within
      such a period, the owner shall be deemed to have refused the consent.

             (3)    If the owner of goods makes a refusal pursuant to sub-
      section (2), the hirer shall, within thirty-five days, make a lawsuit in
      the court to have the refusal voided, and if the court issues an order
      to the effect that the refusal is not reasonable, the consent shall be
      deemed to have been obtained from the owner of goods.

             (4)    If the right, interest or liability of the hirer is transferred
      to another person by operation of law, nothing contained in this
      Section shall be deemed to bar the exercise or performance of such
      right, interest or liability.

634. To be liable for use of goods contrary to terms and conditions: If
      the hirer uses the goods under the hire-purchase contract contrary to
      the terms and conditions of such a contract, the hirer shall be liable
      therefor.

635. Information of actual condition of goods to be given: If the
      owner of goods demands the hirer using the goods under the hire-
      purchase contract to give information as to the place where the
      concerned goods are situated and the state of benefits accrued from




                                      367
     such goods, the hirer shall give information thereof to the owner
     within fifteen days.

636. The owner of goods may terminate contract: (1) If the hirer
     defaults to pay more than one installment of the hire-purchase price
     to be paid to the owner of goods according to the hire-purchase
     contract, the owner of goods shall be entitled to terminate the hire-
     purchase contract at any time, by giving an advance notice as
     follows to the hirer:

                 (a)   If the installment is to be paid within or less than
                       an interval of one week, a period of one week.

                 (b)   In the cases other than that referred to in clause (a),
                       a period of fifteen days.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if the hirer makes payment of the installment and the interest, if any,
     to be accrued thereon according to the hire-purchase contract before
     the expiry of the period for giving an advance notice pursuant to the
     said sub-section, the hire-purchase contract cannot be terminated.

           (3)    If the hirer fails to perform the hire-purchase contract
     or the terms and conditions referred to in Section 629 or 635, the
     concerned owner of goods may terminate the hire-purchase contract,
     by giving a notice of at least fifteen days.

           (4)    In the event of termination of the contract pursuant to
     sub-section (1) or (3), the owner of goods may exercise the
     following rights in relation to the hired goods:




                                    368
            (a)   To take back the goods wherever and in whatever
                  situation they may be, and if the goods cannot be
                  so taken back, to forfeit them,

            (b)   To determine the amount of rent that he or she can
                  recover out of the amount paid in lieu of such
                  goods, and inform the hirer to take back of the
                  exceeding amount,

            (c)   To forfeit the amount, if any, taken as a deposit
                  from the hirer at the time of hiring the goods,

            (d)   To enter the house where the goods are located
                  with the assistance of police in the course of
                  seizing the hired goods,

            (e)   To recover compensation from the amount paid or
                  make a claim for the loss or damage caused from
                  the failure to return the hired goods in time or
                  failure to perform the contract or the terms and
                  conditions referred to in Section 629 or 635.

      (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the hirer, surety or investor has already paid at least the
basic price of the hired goods, the owner of the goods shall not
entitled to terminate the hire-purchase contract under this Section.

      Explanation:     For the purposes of this Section, the term
"basic price" means three-fourths of the amount if the hire-price
amounts to up to fifty thousand rupees and at least half the price if
the hire-purchase price is more than that amount.




                              369
            (6)    If the owner of goods terminates the hire-purchase
      contract in contravention of sub-section (5), the hirer or surety shall
      be in discharge of all liabilities to be fulfilled according to the hire-
      purchase contract and shall be entitled to refund the entire amount
      paid for the goods hired by him or her.

            Provided that the hirer shall return the hired goods to the
      concerned owner of goods.

            (7)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5),
      a restriction to terminate the hire-purchase contract shall not be
      deemed to bar in any manner the right to make a claim for the hire-
      purchase price to be received from the hirer according to the
      contract.

            (8)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, the owner of goods may terminate the hire-purchase
      contract entered into with the person who does not give information
      referred to in Section 635 and, if any loss or damage is caused to
      such goods, make claim for the same as well.

637. Rights of hirer in case of forfeiture of goods: (1) If the owner of
      the goods hired pursuant to clause (a) of sub-section (4) of Section
      636 forfeits the goods, the hirer shall be entitled to refund the
      amount paid in relation to the hire-purchase price up to the day of
      forfeiture and the amount equal to the price of the goods on the day
      of forfeiture from the owner.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
      "price of the goods on the day of forfeiture" means a sum that




                                      370
     remains after making deduction of the following amount or expense
     from the proceeds of sale of the forfeited goods:

                 (1)   Reasonable expenses incurred in course of the
                       forfeiture of the goods,

                 (2)   Reasonable expenses incurred in the storage and
                       repair and maintenance of the goods until the sale
                       of the goods,

                 (3)   Reasonable expenses incurred in the sale or
                       otherwise transfer of the goods,

                 (4)   The amount paid for the taxes, charges, fees or
                       dues, if any, outstanding and payable by the hirer
                       for the goods according to the laws in force,

           (2)    The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be paid
     to the hirer within thirty days after the date of forfeiture of the
     goods, and while making payment thereafter, an interest at the rate
     of ten percent per year shall also be paid.

638. Status of hired goods in case of hirer becoming bankrupt: (1) If
     the court holds, during the currency of a hire-purchase contract, that
     the hirer has become a bankrupt or is likely to be a bankrupt
     according to the laws in force, and as a consequence thereof, the
     liquidator or any other equally competent person taking control of
     the property of such a person shall exercise and fulfill the same
     rights and obligations as the successor has with regard to the goods
     under the hire-purchase contract.

           (2)    If the hirer becomes bankrupt and the bankruptcy
     proceedings are under consideration in any court, the liquidator or


                                   371
     the person exercising the right equal to that of the liquidator
     pursuant to sub-section (1) may, having obtained permission of
     such a court, transfer the goods under the hire-purchase contract to
     another person in any manner, and if such goods are transferred in
     such a manner, the transferee of the goods shall exercise and fulfill
     the rights and obligations under the hire-purchase contract as if the
     transferee were the hirer.

639. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.




                                   372
                              Chapter-14

                    Provisions Relating to Wages

640. Employment in work: (1) Any person who has attained at least
     fourteen years of age may be employed in a work with his or her
     consent.

           Provided that a person who has not attained sixteen years of
     age shall not be employed in a hazardous business or work.

           (2)   While employing any one pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the provisions of this Chapter shall be complied with, or caused to
     be complied with.

641. Wages to be paid: (1) While employing any one in any work
     pursuant to Section 640, the employer shall have to pay the wages
     in proportion to the work except in cases where the employee
     voluntarily agrees to work without wages.

           (2)    While paying the wages pursuant to sub-section (1), if
     any particular rate of wages is specified with the consent of the
     employer and the employee, the wages shall be paid accordingly
     and if no such rate is specified, the wages for the work shall be paid
     according to the rate prevailing in the place of work.

           (3)    Except as otherwise agreed upon between the employer
     and the employee pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the wages shall
     be paid upon completion of the work.

           (4)   While determining the wages according to this Section,
     the wages shall be determined on the basis of each day of work
     except as otherwise agreed upon between the employer and the
     employee.

                                   373
642. Provisions of safety measures to be made: A person shall employ
     another person in a work only after making provisions of adequate
     safety measures to prevent possible risks or danger in view of the
     nature of work.

643. Prohibition of employing for more than eight hours: (1) A
     person may not employ another person in a work under this Chapter
     normally for more than eight hours a day.

           (2)     If a person need to employ another in a work for a
     period more than that set forth in sub-section (1), the consent of the
     employee shall be obtained, and while so employing him or her in
     the work, that person shall pay additional wages for each hour in
     proportion to a day by calculating eight hours as one day.

           (3)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
     the provisions of that sub-section shall not apply to the employment
     of a domestic helper.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     “domestic helper” means a person so employed in work that he or
     she may be employed in a household work at any time as per
     necessity.

644. Special provisions relating to domestic helpers: (1) If a person
     employs another person as a domestic helper, the employer shall
     also comply with the following terms and conditions, in relation to
     the domestic helper:

                  (a)   To determine the wages monthly or annually basis
                        and pay the wages,




                                   374
(b)   To provide meals three times viz. in the morning,
      afternoon and evening, and clothes suitable to the
      weather, according to the capacity of the employer,

(c)   To provide facilities for using appropriate housing,
      toilet and bathroom facilities according to the
      capacity of the employer,

(d)   In the case of a domestic helper below eighteen
      years of age, to make provision for his or her
      study at an appropriate time having regard to
      household work if he or she so wishes,

(e)   To arrange for his or her treatment if the domestic
      helper falls sick,

              Provided that the expenses incurred in his
        or her treatment may not be deducted from his or
        her monthly or yearly wages.

(f)   Not to employ him or her in work while he or she
      is sick, and, in other situations, not to employ him
      or her in such a work that he or she may not be
      able to do due to the age, ability or condition of
      him or her,

(g)   If he or she dies, to bear the expenses incurred in
      the performance of his or her funeral and
      obsequies rites in a normal way,



(h)   Not to commit any inhumane or degrading
      treatment or domestic violence,

                    375
                  (i)   To comply with the other terms and conditions
                        agreed upon between the employer and the
                        domestic helper.

            (2)    The expenses incurred under clauses (b), (c) and (d) of
      sub-section (1) may not be deducted from the monthly or yearly
      wages of the domestic helper.

            (3)    If a person employs another person as a domestic
      helper, that person shall give written information thereof to the
      concerned ward committee of the concerned Local Level within one
      month after the date of such an employment.

645. Undertaken work not to be left incomplete: (1) If a person
      assumes responsibility to do or undertakes to do any work, the
      person shall not leave the work incomplete except for a reasonable
      ground.

            (2) If a person leaves a work incomplete as mentioned in
      sub-section (1), the person leaving the work shall bear the
      obligation therefor.

646. Wages to be paid to employee: (1) The employer shall pay such
      wages as required to be paid for employment to the employee or
      any other person whom he or she has consented to.

            (2)    If the employee dies prior to the payment of wages
      pursuant to sub-section (1), the wages he or she is entitled to shall
      be paid to his or her nearest successor.

647. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved in relation to any
      of the matters under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
      months after the date of accrual of the cause of action in the case of


                                    376
Section 644, and within thirty-five days in the case of the other
matters.




                            377
                              Chapter-15

         Provisions Relating to Indirect or Quasi-Contracts

648. Indirect    or   quasi-contract     deemed    to   be    made:     (1)
     Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter-2 of this Part, if any
     person does any certain, lawful, voluntary or unilateral act that may
     give rise to a juridical relationship, an indirect or quasi-contract
     shall be deemed to be made.

           (2)    If an indirect or quasi-contract is made pursuant to sub-
     section (1), an obligation under this Chapter shall be created from
     the same fact.

649. If other’s property managed voluntarily, not to be abandoned
     (negotiorum gestio): If a person manages or operates a business or
     property of another person on his or her own without information to,
     or authority from, that other person, the person shall, so long as
     such business or property continues to exist, not abandon such
     business or property without handing it over to that other person,
     his or her successor or agent or until that other person removes him
     or her.

650. To care (herbichar) or manage property taken in custody: (1) If
     a person takes the custody of a property belonging to another
     person for its care or management, the person shall take care of and
     manage the property in good faith as if that were his or her own
     property.

           (2)    If a person who takes the custody of a property
     pursuant to sub-section (1) causes loss or damage to the property




                                   378
     with malafide intention or recklessly, the person shall pay
     compensation therefor.

651. Not absolved from obligation by delegation of authority: If a
     person, who is entrusted by another person with a responsibility to
     do any act, delegates any or all of his or her powers to another
     person to do that act in a manner not to be prejudicial to the
     obligation vis-à-vis that other person, the person shall not be free
     from his or her own obligation by the reason of such delegation.

652. Reasonable costs to be paid for saving property in times of
     disaster: If any person saves or protects any property in times of
     disaster such as fire, flood, landslide, storm and earthquake without
     giving information to its owner, the owner of property shall
     reimburse the reasonable expenses incurred in saving or protecting
     such property to such a person.

653. Right to claim reimbursement: (1) If a person, in spite of being
     compelled by law to fulfill any obligation, fulfills such obligation at
     his or her own expense and another person gets anything or benefit
     due to the fulfillment of such an obligation or for any other reason,
     the person fulfilling such an obligation may claim reimbursement of
     the amount incurred therein from the person who so gets such thing
     or benefit.

           (2)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a person fulfills any obligation for any illegal purpose, the person
     shall not be entitled to claim reimbursement from the same.

654. Right to claim for maintenance: If a person rears and maintains
     another person without giving information to the person obliged to



                                   379
     rear and maintain that other person, the person who so rears and
     maintains shall be entitled to claim an amount for such rearing and
     maintenance from the person under such obligation.

           Provided that if he or she maintains such a person by way of
     compassion or gratification or with intention to do so gratuitously,
     he or she shall not be entitled to claim such an amount.

655. Successor to reimburse expenses incurred in obsequies of
     deceased: If any person performs the funeral and obsequies acts of
     a deceased in accordance with his or her rites, tradition and culture,
     without giving information to the successor to or close relative of
     the deceased and claims the expenses incurred in the performance
     of such funeral and obsequies acts, the closest heir to, and, in the
     absence of the heir, the relative of, the deceased shall reimburse that
     person for the expenses.

656. To bear expenses in maintenance (palan poshan)of incompetent
     person: If a person obliged to maintain (palan poshan)or take care
     of (herbichar) a person of unsound mind, a person with physical
     infirmity or a helpless minor having no income of his or her own
     refuses to maintain such a person and any other person maintains
     (palan poshan)or takes care of (herbichar) him or her, that other
     person shall be entitled to claim reimbursement for the expenses
     incurred therein from the person under such an obligation.

657. Treatment expenses to be reimbursed: If a person becomes
     seriously ill owing to an accident or other reason and any other
     person, except his or her heir living in the joint family, relative or
     close person, conducts, or causes to be conducted medical treatment
     of him or her voluntarily, the heir, relative or close person to him

                                   380
     shall reimburse that other person who has conducted, or caused to
     be conducted, the treatment for the expenses incurred in such
     treatment.

           Provided that if the treatment has been conducted, or caused
     to be conducted, with the intention of doing so gratuitously, the
     expenses need not be reimbursed.

658. To bear expenses made by public bodies: If a person voluntarily
     omits to follow the necessary health or safety measures required to
     be followed according to law for the protection of body, life or
     property of him or her or of the public, and if any government or
     public body follows, or causes to be followed, such measures, the
     person shall pay reasonable expenses incurred for that purpose even
     if he or she does not agree to follow, or cause to be followed, such
     measures.

659. To reimburse amount paid by person interested in: If a contract
     is so concluded that a person promises to pay any amount which
     another person is bound by law to pay and if that person fails to pay
     it, and other person who has to pay, pays it, the person concluding a
     contract shall reimburse such an amount to that person.

660. To pay price or remuneration: If a person delivers any goods to
     or does any work for another person, that other person shall pay the
     price of such goods or service or remuneration of the work to the
     person.

661. Right to recover price of goods or services: If a person has
     supplies any goods or service to another person who is incapable of
     conclusion of a contract under law or any one whom such incapable



                                  381
     person is legally responsible to support, the person may recover the
     price of such goods or service from the person receiving such goods
     or service.

662. Property in custody to be kept as bailed property: If a person
     keeps in any manner in his or her custody property owned by
     another as may be retained according to law, such a person shall
     keep such property as a property under bailment.

663. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.




                                   382
                                     Chapter-16

               Provisions Relating to Unjust Enrichment

664. Unjust enrichment to be deemed: (1) If any person gets any benefit
      or advantage from another person, without for the reason of doing
      any lawful act or fulfilling any obligation, the person who so gets the
      benefit or advantage shall be deemed to have got an unjust
      enrichment.

            (2)         A person shall be deemed to have got an unjust
      enrichment under sub-section (1) in any of the following
      circumstances:

                  (a)      If there is an increment in his or her property or
                           decrease in his or her liability,

                  (b)      If he or she receives a service from another or causes
                           another to do a work,

                  (c)      If other’s property is used for him or her.

            (3)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
      or (2), even if any person gets any goods, service, benefit or
      advantage in any manner, except in any of the following
      circumstances, he or she shall be deemed to have got an unjust
      enrichment:

                  (a)      If any goods, service, benefit or advantage can be
                           obtained from any person under a law or contract,

                  (b)      If the person, from whom any goods, service, benefit
                           or advantage have been obtained, has agreed with
                           free consent not to take back or reimburse the same.



                                         383
           (4)     In determining whether or not and to what extent any
     person has got an unjust enrichment under this Chapter, no
     consideration shall be granted to any disadvantage or loss or damage
     caused thereby to him or her after he or she has got the unjust
     enrichment.

           (5)     If a person gets an unjust enrichment pursuant to this
     Section, the person shall bear the obligation under this Chapter.

665. Thing taken by mistake to be returned (solutio indebiti): If any
     person takes or receives by mistake any goods which he or she is not
     entitled to take or receive, he or she shall return the goods to the
     person from whom he or she has taken or received them.

666. To pay back debt paid by mistake: If a person pays a debt to
     another person by mistake because the person thinks that he or she is
     bound to do so and proves that he or she is not bound to pay such
     debt, that other person who receives such amount shall return it to
     him or her.

667. To return goods or amount taken with malafide intention and
     benefits accrued therefrom: (1) If any person receives from another
     person with malafide intention any amount or goods in which he or
     she has no claim, he or she shall return to that other person such
     amount or goods and the interest to be chargeable on such amount
     under the law or the advantage or return accrued from such goods,
     from the date of receipt of such amount or goods to the date of their
     return.




                                   384
             (2)       If the amount or goods received pursuant to sub-section
      (1) are lost or damaged for any reason, he or she shall also pay the
      compensation therefor.

668. To pay debt paid by third person: If a debt payable by a person is
      paid by a third person without the debtor's knowledge, the debtor
      shall pay the debt to the person who has so paid it.

669. Right to claim reimbursement if payable tax paid by another
      person: If a tax payable by a person is paid by another person, that
      other person who has so paid the tax may claim reimbursement
      therefor from the person who is obliged to pay it.

             Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “tax”
      means any type of government fee, charge, tariff, duty and fine, and
      also includes a local tax.

670. Goods found may be kept upon giving information to police: (1)
      If any person finds any goods in any manner, he or she may, having
      given a notice thereof, along with actual description thereof, to the
      police, safely retain such goods with him or her until the concerned
      owner is found.

             (2)       The concerned owner shall bear the expenses incurred
      in finding the owner of goods referred to in sub-section (1) and
      retaining such goods, and the finder of goods may retain the goods
      until the payment of such expenses.

             (3)       If no person appears to claim the goods retained
      pursuant to sub-section (1) until three years, the goods shall belong
      to the finder.




                                       385
671. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done
      or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within two
      years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.




                                     386
                                Chapter-17

                       Provisions Relating to Torts

672. Tort deemed to be committed: (1) No person shall cause loss or
      damage, in any manner, to another person's body, life or property or
      legally protected right or interest by the reason of commission or
      omission done, whether by any default, negligence or recklessness
      on the part of himself or herself or of any one else to whom he or
      she must bear obligation according to this Chapter.

            (2)    If the parties do not have any prior contractual
      relationship in relation to any commission or omission referred to in
      sub-section (1), the loss or damage resulted from such a
      commission or recklessness shall be deemed to be a tort.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      "omission" means the state of failure of a person to do any act
      which the person is bound to do.

            (3)    A person who commits a tort pursuant to sub-section
      (1) shall bear liability under this Chapter.

673. Parents to bear liability: The father and mother jointly living with
      a minor below fourteen years of age, or if there is no father or
      mother, the person who exercises paternal authority over him or her
      shall be liable for a tort committed by such a minor.

674. Guardian or curator to bear liability: The guardian or curator of
      a person of unsound mind shall be responsible for and accordingly
      bear liability for any loss or damage caused by such a person.

675. Employer to bear liability: (1) Any person, firm, company or
      organization who employs a domestic helper, other worker or

                                     387
     employee in a work shall be liable for the loss or damage to another
     person, if any, resulted from any act done in good faith by such a
     helper, worker or employee in the course of doing such a work.

            (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     the worker or employee shall be personally liable for any act which
     he or she has done negligently or dishonestly.

676. Owner of animal to bear liability for loss or damage caused by
     animal: The owner of an animal which is kept by or under the
     control of him or her shall be liable for any loss or damage caused
     by the animal to any one.

           Provided that the owner of animal shall not be liable for any
     loss or damage caused by the animal while being appropriately
     controlled by the owner by taking adequate safety measures
     according to its behavior or caused as a result of any act, default or
     negligence of the loss or damage sustaining person himself or
     herself.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
     "animal" means a domestic animal or wildlife or avian of any type
     under one's control, and also includes a domestic, reptile or wild
     avian as well.

677. House-owner to bear liability for loss or damage caused by its
     collapse: The concerned house-owner shall be liable for any kind of
     loss or damage, if any, caused to any one as a result of the collapse
     of the house, in whole or in part, or by any part of the house,
     whether during, or after the completion of, its construction.




                                   388
678. Owner of property to bear liability: The concerned property
     owner shall be liable for the loss or damage, if any, caused to any
     one as a result of the following:

           (a)    An explosion owing to a failure to adopt safety
                  measures properly according to the nature of a machine,
                  equipment or engine,

           (b)    A fire or explosion owing to a failure to adopt safety
                  measures properly according to the nature of any
                  inflammable or explosive substance,

           (c)    Emission of excessive smoke, noise by any industrial
                  enterprise in contravention of the specified standards,

           (d)    A tree lying down or laid down on any highway, road,
                  street or way except due to a disaster or an act by any
                  third person,

           (e)    Discharge of any infected or toxic substance or
                  communicable disease carrying substance openly
                  through a canal, ditch, pipe or sewerage, without
                  adopting    precautionary     measures      properly,     in
                  contravention of the specified standards.

679. House-head to bear liability: The concerned house-head shall be
     liable for the loss or damage, if any, caused to any one as a result of
     any kind of solid waste or goods thrown from the house.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,-

           (1)    "House" means a house or shed, and also includes the
                  structure of a house.



                                   389
           (2)       "House-head" means a person who acts as the chief of
                     family, and also includes, in the case of a tenant
                     renting other’s house, the person who acts as the chief
                     of the tenant’s family.

680. To bear liability for trespass: A person who commits trespass to
     other's property shall be liable for any loss or damage resulted from
     the trespass.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
     "trespass" means an unlawful entry into, taking possession of
     products of, unauthorized damage to, interference in, or unlawful
     encroachment on, a property that is under entitlement, possession or
     ownership of another person, in the case of an immovable property,
     and forcibly taking into custody, taking away, taking the advantage
     arising out of, or causing obstruction or hindrance in the use of, the
     property under entitlement, possession or ownership of another
     person, in the case of a movable property, and also includes an act
     of taking control of any type of property in an unauthorized manner.

681. To bear liability jointly: (1) If more than one person commit any
     act to be deemed a tort under this Chapter, each of such persons
     shall, except as otherwise proved, be jointly and severally liable for
     any damage caused by that act, in proportion to the culpability of
     the tort committed by each person.

           (2)       If separate liability can be determined in proportion to
     the culpability of tort pursuant to sub-section (1), liability shall be
     borne accordingly, and if such determination cannot be made, all
     persons responsible for the tort shall bear liability on an equal basis.



                                      390
682. Compensation to be paid for liability: (1) While bearing liability
      for a tort committed under this Chapter, the person who commits
      the tort shall pay compensation.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if any tort is committed under this Chapter as a result of any
      omission, fault, recklessness or negligence of the injured person
      also, the quantum of such compensation shall be lesser.

            (3)    The compensation referred to in sub-section (1) shall
      be limited to the actual loss or damage, and remote or unactual
      compensation shall not be recoverable.

            (4)    The compensation may be of any type, in the form of
      either cash or kind or service.

            (5)    If any loss or damage is caused under this Chapter, a
      person who suffers shall be entitled to claim for compensation,
      subject to this Chapter.

            (6)    If a claim is made for compensation pursuant to sub-
      section (5), the court may order reasonable compensation to be paid.

683. Not to bear liability if separate provision is made: (1)
      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a
      tort for which liability is to be borne under this Chapter is treated as
      a criminal offence under a law, or this Act or other law contains a
      separate provision or provides for a separate legal remedy in
      relation to such a tort, no liability under this Chapter may be borne.

            (2)    Subject to sub-section (1), if the alleged tortfeasor
      proves that the tort for which liability is to be borne under this
      Chapter was resulted not from his or her negligence, recklessness,


                                     391
     fault or omission but from any other reason, he or she shall be
     released from the liability for such a tort.

684. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     six months after the date on which such an act was done or action
     was taken.




                                    392
                              Chapter-18

       Provisions Relating to Liability for Defective Products

685. To be liable for defective product: (1) No person shall produce
     any defective product and sell or distribute, or cause to be sold or
     distributed, any defective goods or service.

           (2)   The producer of a defective product referred to in sub-
     section (1) shall bear liability under this Chapter for the loss or
     damage, if any, caused to the body, life or property of any person as
     a result of the consumption of such product sold or distributed by
     any one.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-

           (1)   "Defective product" means any goods or service which,
                 for any of the following reasons, lack the minimum
                 safety measures that a person of general prudence
                 reasonably expects while consuming any product:

                 (a)      Defective design, manufacturing, processing or
                          installation,

                 (b)      Defective packing, safety or storage,

                 (c)      Defective presentation,

                 (d)      Lacking adequate measures or precautions to
                          control the potential risk or danger according to
                          the nature of the produced good or service.

           (2)   "Producer" means a producer who ultimately produces,
                 sells and distributes any defective goods or service, and
                 also includes the following person:


                                   393
                  (a) The distributor or seller if the producer cannot be
                       traced out,

                  (b) In the case of any imported product, the importer
                       of the defective product or the distributor or seller
                       of such product.

           (3)    "Good" means any industrial product for consumption
                  by the public.

686. Claimant to prove that product is defective: If any person makes
     a claim that any good or service is a defective product and he or she
     has suffered injury to his or her body, life or property from the
     consumption thereof, he or she shall prove that there is the
     relationship between such defective product and the injury, and that
     such injury has resulted solely from the consumption of such
     product.

687. To be in discharge of liability: Notwithstanding anything
     contained in Section 685, the producer shall not be liable if he or
     she proves any of the following facts:

                 (a)   He or she has not produced, sold or distributed the
                       defective product,

                 (b)   The goods or service that he or she produced,
                       imported, sold or distributed was not defective at
                       the time of production, import, sale or distribution
                       or it became defective after the sale or distribution,

                 (c)   The goods or service that he or she produced has
                       not been marketed, sold or distributed,




                                     394
                (d)     The injury has been caused due to the consumer's
                        failure to comply with the directions to be
                        complied with while consuming the produced
                        goods or service,

                (e)     The injury has been caused because the consumer
                        has not properly consumed the product or has
                        consumed it otherwise,

                (f)     One had no scientific or technical knowledge at
                        the time of production or distribution of the goods
                        or service that such goods or service was defective,

                (g)     Information was given at the time of sale of the
                        product, from which the injury has been caused,
                        that it might cause injury if not consumed properly,

                (h)     The goods or service has been consumed despite
                        knowing or having a reasonable reason to know
                        that it might cause loss or damage.

688. Quantum of liability may be reduced: Notwithstanding anything
     contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if it is proved that the injury
     has been caused due to both the producer and the consumer of a
     defective product, the producer's liability may be reduced
     proportionately.

           Provided that if such injury has resulted in a loss or damage
     to a third party, the quantum of liability may not be reduced in the
     case of such a party.

689. Product not deemed to be defective: Goods or service consumed
     by a person shall not be considered to be a defective product merely


                                    395
     by the reason that any goods or service of quality higher than that of
     such goods or service is available in the market.

690. Not to prejudice other right: Nothing contained in this Chapter
     shall prejudice the right, interest or claim available under a law or
     contract to any person whose body, life or property has been
     affected from a defective product.

691. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
     done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
     one year from the date on which such an act was done or action
     taken.




                                   396
                                Part-6

          Provisions Relating to Private International Law

692. Provisions of this Part to apply: (1) The provisions of this Part
     shall apply to any matter relating to private legal relationship
     involving a foreigner, foreign object or any act done in a foreign
     country.

           (2)   Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1),
     the provisions of this sub-section shall apply, in particular, to the
     following matters:

           (a)   Legal status of a foreigner and his or her capacity,

           (b)   Matters relating to matrimonial relationship, paternal
                 and maternal and other family relationship or partition
                 or succession, with at least one of the related parties
                 whereof being a foreigner, or the place of execution of
                 any act or action related thereto being situated outside
                 Nepal,

           (c)   Matter relating to a property situated in a foreign
                 country, with at least one of the concerned parties
                 being a foreigner,

           (d)   Matter relating to a contractual or non-contractual right
                 or obligation, with at least one party being a foreigner,

           (e)   Matter relating to a contract made in a foreign country.




                                  397
           Explanation: For the purposes of this Part, the term
     “foreigner” means a foreign natural person or body corporate, and
     also includes a foreign state.

693. Legal capacity of foreigner to be determined: (1) The legal
     capacity of any foreign natural person shall be determined
     according to the law of the country of his or her nationality.

           (2)    If the nationality of a foreign natural person cannot be
     ascertained pursuant to sub-section (1), his or her capacity shall be
     determined according to the law of the country of his or her
     habitual residence, and even if such residence cannot be ascertained,
     according to the law of the country where he or she is residing for
     the time being.

           (3)    The legal capacity or status of a body corporate shall
     be determined according to the law of the country where it is
     registered, if the country of registration cannot be so ascertained,
     according to the law of the country where the headquarters of such
     body is located, and if even such a country cannot be ascertained,
     according to the law of the country where the place of transaction
     of such a body is located.

694. Presumption of disappearance or death of foreigner: (1) If a
     presumption of the disappearance or death of a foreigner has to be
     made, the matter shall be determined according to the law of the
     country of his or her nationality.

           (2)    If the nationality of a foreigner cannot be ascertained
     pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be determined according to the


                                      398
     law of the country of his or her habitual residence, and even if such
     residence cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the country
     of his or her residence immediately before making presumption of
     his or her disappearance or death.

695. Successor to be determined according to foreign law: While
     determining the successor to a foreigner residing in Nepal when his
     or her property is open for succession, the successor shall be
     determined according to the law of the country of his or her
     nationality, if such country cannot be determined, according to the
     law of the country of his or her habitual residence, and if even such
     residence cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the country
     where he or she is residing for the time being.

696. Determination of succession of deceased: (1) If succession is
     open because of the death of any foreigner in Nepal and it is
     therefore necessary to determine his or her successor to the property
     situated in Nepal and the order of preference thereof, it shall be
     determined according to the law of the country of his or her
     nationality at the time of his or her death.

           (2)    If the law referred to in sub-section (1) cannot be
     ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of the
     country of his or her habitual residence at the time of his or her
     death, and if even such country cannot be ascertained, according to
     the law of Nepal.

697. Determination of the nature of corporate body: Question as
     regards whether a company, foundation or other corporate body is



                                    399
     public or private shall be determined according to the law of the
     country of incorporation of such a company, foundation or body,
     and if such law cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the
     country where the registered office or headquarters of such a
     company, foundation or corporate body is situated.

698. Regulation of property: (1) Succession to a movable property
     shall be governed by the law of the country of habitual residence of
     the deceased at the time of his or her death.

           (2)    Succession to an immovable property shall be
     governed by the law of the country where such property is situated.

699. Citizen of Nepal to follow law of Nepal while concluding
     marriage abroad: (1) A citizen of Nepal shall, while concluding a
     marriage in a foreign country, comply with such competency,
     qualification and conditions for marriage as specified by the law of
     Nepal.

           (2)    The formalities to be fulfilled by a citizen of Nepal
     while concluding a marriage in a foreign country shall be governed
     by the law of the country where the marriage is concluded.

                 Provided that while concluding a marriage at an
     embassy or consulate general of Nepal situated in a foreign country,
     the formalities referred to in the law of Nepal shall be followed.

           (3)    A marriage concluded in contravention of sub-sections
     (1) and (2) shall not be recognized in Nepal.

700. Foreigner to follow law of his or her country while concluding
     marriage in Nepal: (1) While concluding a marriage between

                                   400
     foreigners or between a foreigner and a citizen of Nepal in Nepal,
     each person entering into marriage shall comply with the capacity,
     qualification and condition as specified by the law of the respective
     country of his or her nationality.

              (2) The formalities to be fulfilled by the foreigners while
     concluding marriage in Nepal shall be governed by the law of Nepal.

              Provided that while concluding a marriage at a foreign
     embassy or consulate general situated in Nepal, the formalities
     referred to in the law of the concerned country shall be fulfilled.

              (3)   A marriage concluded in contravention of sub-sections
     (1) and (2) shall not be recognized in Nepal.

701. Consequence of marriage to be according to law of one’s
     country: (1) The matrimonial relationship between the couple after
     the marriage and the consequence of marriage shall be determined
     according to the law of the country of their nationality if both
     spouses have the same nationality, and if the country of their
     nationality is not the same, according to the law of the country of
     their habitual residence and if even such a country is not the same,
     according to the law of the country of their residence for the time
     being.

              (2)   If the consequence of marriage cannot be determined
     pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be determined according to the
     law of the country of their marriage.

702. Paternal authority to be governed by law of the country of
     nationality: (1) The relationship between father, mother and son,


                                   401
     daughter including paternal authority shall be governed by the law
     of the country of nationality of the son or daughter, as the case may
     be.

             (2)   If the law referred to in sub-section (1) is not
     ascertained, it shall be governed by the law of the country of
     habitual residence of the father, mother and, if even such country
     cannot be ascertained, by the law of the country of their residence
     for the time being.

703. To be governed by the law of the country of nationality of
     adoptive person: Subsequent to the adoption of a son or daughter,
     the relationship between the adoptive person and the adopted son or
     daughter shall be governed by the law of the country of nationality
     of the adoptive person, and if such law cannot be ascertained, by
     the law of the country of habitual residence of the adoptive person,
     and if even such law cannot be ascertained, by the law of the
     country where the adoptive parents are habitually spending marital
     life.

704. Determination of guardianship or curatorship: (1) The
     guardianship or curatorship of an incompetent or quasi-competent
     person shall be determined according to the law of the country of
     nationality of that person.

             (2)   If the country referred to in sub-section (1) cannot be
     ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of the
     country of his or her habitual residence, and if even such country




                                   402
      cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the country of his or
      her habitual residence for the time being.

            (3)   The relationship between the guardian or curator and
      the person under his or her guardianship or curatorship shall be
      determined according to the law of the country of the guardian or
      curator or the law of the country where the guardian or curator is
      appointed as such.

            Provided that if the habitual residence of the person who is
      under guardianship or curatorship is in Nepal, it shall be determined
      according to the law of Nepal.

705. To be determined according to the law of residence: (1) The
      matter of separation of bread and board shall be governed by the
      law of the country of habitual residence of the married couple.

            (2)   If, in governing the matter pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the country of habitual residence of the couple is not the same, it
      shall be governed by the law of the last country of their habitual
      residence, and if even such a country cannot be ascertained, by the
      law of the court where the case of alimony is sub judice.

706. Divorce effected abroad to be recognized: If a divorce is effected
      between the citizens of Nepal or between a citizen of Nepal and a
      foreigner in a foreign country, such a divorce shall, if effected in
      accordance with the law of that country, be recognized and
      enforced in Nepal in accordance with the law of Nepal.

707. Content of ownership to be determined according to law of
      country where property is situated: (1) The content of ownership


                                    403
     or possession of any property shall be determined according to the
     law of the country where such property is situated.

           (2)       A question as regards the maintenance or termination
     of ownership in an immovable property shall be determined
     according to the law of the country where such property is situated.

708. Goods to be governed by law of destination: Any goods in transit
     in the course of carriage shall be governed by the law of their
     destination.

709. Governing law of contract to be as determined by parties: (1)
     The governing law of any contract shall be as determined in the
     contract by its parties.

           (2)       If no law is determined pursuant to sub-section (1),
     such a contract shall be governed by the law of the country of its
     performance, and if even such a country cannot be ascertained, by
     the law of the country where it was concluded.

           Provided that a contract concluded in Nepal shall be
     governed by the law of Nepal.

710. Deed executed abroad to be recognized: The validity of any
     contract or deed executed outside Nepal shall be determined
     according to the law of the country where it has been executed, and
     such a contract or deed shall be deemed lawful and recognized in
     Nepal if it has been duly executed in accordance with the law of
     that country.

711. To be governed by law of nationality of donor: (1) The matter
     concerning validity of a donation or gift shall be governed by the

                                    404
     law of the country of donor's nationality existing when the donation
     or gift was made.

           (2)   If the formalities are completed according to the law of
     the country where a donation or gift is given, the donation or gift
     shall be deemed to be duly given.

712. Determination of liability for tort: (1) While determining the
     liability for an act which, according to law constitutes a tort,
     involving a foreigner, foreign object or act done in a foreign
     country, it shall be determined according to the law of the country
     where such an act has been taken place.

           (2)   If any act referred to in sub-section (1) originates in
     one country and results in consequence in another country, the
     liability shall be determined according to the law of the country
     where the consequence so results.

           (3)   If the liability cannot be determined pursuant to sub-
     section (2), it shall be determined according to the law of the
     country where the tortious act has been committed.

713. Liability for quasi-contract or unjust enrichment: The liability
     for a quasi-contract or unjust enrichment shall be determined
     according to the law of the country where such an act has been done.

714. Other matters to be determined according to recognized
     principles of private international law: (1) While determining
     any matter that is not dealt with in this Part involving a foreigner,
     foreign object or act done in a foreign country, such a matter shall
     be determined according to the law of Nepal, if Law of Nepal


                                  405
     provides separate provision in relation to that matter, and failing
     such separate provision, according to the recognized principles of
     private international law.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if all parties of the relevant matter so agree, the matter referred to in
     sub-section (1) shall be determined according to the law of Nepal.

715. In case of double nationality, law of country of habitual
     residence to be applied: (1) If this Part contains a provision to the
     effect that any matter is determined according to the law of the
     country of nationality and a person is having nationality of two or
     more countries at the same time, his or her nationality shall be
     determined according to the law of the county of his or her
     nationality, where he or she habitually resides.

           (2)    If such a matter cannot be determined according to the
     law of the country referred to in sub-section (1), it shall be
     determined according to the law of the country of his or her
     nationality, to which he or she has most closest connection.

           Provided that in the case of a person who holds also the
     citizenship of Nepal or who has habitual residence in Nepal or is a
     non-resident Nepali citizen, it shall be determined according to the
     law of Nepal.

           (3)    If the matter referred to in sub-section (1) concerns a
     refugee or stateless person, it shall be determined according to the
     law of the country of his or her habitual residence, and if even such




                                    406
      a law cannot be determined, according to the law of the country of
      his or her residence for the time being.

716. Power to give permission for trial of case by foreign court: (1) If
      both parties to a case which involves a foreign party and is sub
      judice in a court of Nepal make a joint petition to the court,
      specifying the reason that it is appropriate and practicable for that
      case to be resolved by a court of the country of residence of such
      party and the matter is found reasonable upon examination of the
      petition, the court may give permission for the proceedings of the
      case by the foreign court as demanded by the parties to such a case.

            (2)    Once the court has given permission for the proceeding
      of a case by a foreign court pursuant to sub-section (1), no
      proceeding shall be made again by a court of Nepal in the same
      matter.

717. Power to adjourn case sub judice in court of Nepal: If any case
      between the parties is sub judice in a court of Nepal and a case is
      running also in a foreign court between such parties in the same
      matter, and the parties, having considered that the case pending in
      the court of Nepal is likely to be directly affected by a judgment to
      be made in the case between them running in the foreign court,
      apply for the adjournment of the case running in Nepal, the court
      may adjourn such a case until their case pending in the foreign
      court is adjudged.




                                    407
718. Court of Nepal to have jurisdiction: A court of Nepal shall have
     jurisdiction to adjudicate the proceedings and settle any disputes
     arising in connection with the following matters:

         (a)   A matter between the foreigners who reside in Nepal or
               between a foreigner and a citizen of Nepal, that is
               governed by this Act or other law,

         (b)   A matter of a case of which a foreigner residing in Nepal
               is a defendant,

         (c)   A matter as regards the succession of a foreigner who
               resided in Nepal and had property in Nepal at the time of
               his or her death,

         (d)   A matter concerning payment to be made in Nepal on a
               financial transaction or dealing made abroad between a
               citizen of Nepal and a foreigner,

         (e)   A matter between foreigners or between a foreigner and a
               citizen of Nepal, concerning a property situated in Nepal,

         (f)   A matter concerning a contract concluded in or to be
               performed in Nepal between foreigners or to which at
               least one party is a citizen or body corporate of Nepal,

         (g)   A matter concerning a tort, quasi-contract or unjust
               enrichment committed outside Nepal, where both parties
               are citizens of Nepal or foreigners who have habitual
               residence in Nepal,




                                     408
          (h)     A matter to be adjudicated by a court of Nepal under sub-
                  section (2) of Section 699.

719. Other matters concerning a case may also be settled by court of
      Nepal: If it appears that any other matter related to any case
      involving a foreigner instituted in a court of Nepal under its
      jurisdiction to settle the main dispute should also be settled, the
      court may assume its jurisdiction over that matter also and settle it
      accordingly.

720. Treaty, if any, to apply: If any treaty to which Nepal is a party
      contains a separate provision on any matter set forth in this Part,
      nothing contained in this Part shall affect such provision.

721. Provisions of this Part not to apply: (1) Notwithstanding anything
      contained elsewhere in this Part, if the application of any legal
      provision under this Part in Nepal would be contrary to public order,
      the provision contained in this Part shall not be applicable in such
      circumstance.

            (2)      If there arises a circumstance referred to in sub-section
      (1), the matters contained in this Part shall be governed by other
      linking criteria, and if such criteria cannot be determined, by the
      law of Nepal.




                                      409


Annex-2




 THE CIVIL
PROCEDURES
   CODE



    497
     A Bill Made to Amend and Consolidate Laws Relating to Civil
                                 Procedures



Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make the civil procedure simplified
and timely, by amending and consolidating the prevailing laws relating to
procedures on filing, proceedings, hearing and settlement of civil cases, and
other procedures pertaining thereto, and the execution of decisions made on
such cases,

      Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Constituent Assembly pursuant to
clause (1) of Article 83 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2007.



                                 Chapter-1

                                Preliminary

1.    Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
      "Civil Procedure Code, 2010"

              (2)   This Code shall commence on the fourteenth day of the
      month of April of the year 2011.

2.    Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
      this Code:

      (a)     "Court" means the Supreme Court, Appellate Court or District
              Court, and also includes any other judicial body or authority




                                     498
      empowered by law to try and settle civil cases of any specific
      type.

(b)   "Law" means the law in force for the time being;

(c)   "Endorsement" means an order made by the concerned officer
      of the court on the reverse side or any other part of a document
      or on a separate paper, that cannot be filed pursuant to law,
      setting out the grounds and reasons for not filing the document
      and putting his/her signature thereon.

(d)   "Civil case" means a case relating to a legal right, status,
      position, family relation and property, other than a case defined
      by law as a criminal case, and also includes a case on any of the
      following matters:

      (1)     matters relating to establishment relationship or divorce,

      (2)     matters relating to fees, remuneration, salary, allowance,
              wages, compensation,

      (3)     matters relating to partition, succession, donation and gift,
              testamentary will, guardian, curator, maternal and
              paternal authority, adoption,

      (4)     matters relating to any right, claim or compensation
              under any contract, quasi-contract or unjust enrichment,

      (5)     matters relating to any right, claim or compensation
              relating to tort, quasi-tort or defective product,

      (6)     matters relating to servitudes,




                                 499
      (7)   Matters relating to any other right or liability of civil
            nature.

(e)   "Judge" means an authority of the court who tries, hears and
      settles a case, and also includes the authority competent to try,
      hear and settle any specific type of civil cases.

(f)   "Memorandum of appeal" means a petition, accompanied by
      own pleas, made by a person who is not satisfied with a
      decision of the lower court to the higher court for the correction
      of such a decision.

(g)   "Statement of defense" means a written statement admitting or
      rebutting the claims set forth in the plaint and submitted to the
      court, and also includes deposition equivalent to the statement
      of defense.

(h)   "Counterclaim" means a claim made by a defendant on the
      claim made by a plaintiff.

(i)   "Defendant" means a person who submits a statement of
      defense, and also includes a person who makes a deposition as
      if he/she were a defendant or a person who has been set by the
      court as a defendant.

(j)   "Plaint" means a complaint, suit, claim or petition praying for
      the establishment of one's right, interest or concern on any
      matter or the execution of one claim, and also includes a
      deposition equivalent to a plaint or a counterclaim set forth in
      the statement of defense.




                               500
     (k)   "Case-file" means a file that records a plaint, statement of
           defense, memorandum of appeal, petition and proofs and
           evidence and other documents as collected.

     (l)   "Case" means a civil case.

     (m)   "Summons" means a notice or summons issued by a court in the
           name of any person in the course of proceedings on a case.

     (n)   "Plaintiff" means a person who makes a plaint and also includes
           a person who submits a counter-claim, as well.

     (o)   "Local body" means the village development committee or
           municipality, as the case may be.

     (p)   "Property" means a movable or immovable property.

3.   Matters set forth in separate law not to be affected: (1) The
     provisions set forth in several procedural laws made on several
     matters shall govern such matters, and nothing contained in this Code
     shall affect such matters.

           (2)    This Code shall apply to the procedures not set forth in
     the laws as referred to in sub-section (1).




                                     501
                             Chapter-2
             General Principles of Civil Procedure Code
4.   Principles to be followed in civil cases: In trying, hearing and
     adjudicating, the courts shall generally follow the principles and
     provisions set forth in this Chapter.
5.   Hearing to be held in open bench: Except as otherwise provided for
     in law or except as otherwise ordered by the court on a petition by a
     party of a case, cases shall be tried, heard and adjudicated in open
     bench.
6.   Hearing to be held by competent court: A case shall be tried, heard
     and adjudicated by a competent court in accordance with law.
7.   Question of entitlement to be adjudicated by court only: If there
     arises a question of entitlement or disentitlement on any matter, such a
     question shall be settled by a regular court only.
              Explanation: For the purposes of this Code, the expression
     "regular court" means the District Court, Appellate Court or Supreme
     Court.
8.   Dispute relating to legal status to be settled by court: (1) A dispute
     relating to settlement of relationship, divorce or legal status of any
     person shall be adjudicated by the regular court only.
              (2)   If it appears, in the course of proceedings of a case, that
     the other matters should be tried, heard and adjudicated only after the
     settlement of the question of entitlement, and a case is sub judice in
     any other court or body, the court shall order the parties to obtain
     settlement of the question of entitlement from the regular court.




                                      502
9.    Status of parties to be equal: (1) In trying, hearing and adjudicating
      a case, the status of parties to the case shall equal.
            (2)    The court shall treat each party equally.
            (2)    If, in the course of proceedings of a case, the
      Government of Nepal, any body thereof or any legal person is present
      before the court as a plaintiff or defendant, except as otherwise
      provided for in law or except as otherwise ordered by the court, the
      Government of Nepal, any body thereof or any legal person may not
      claim any separate status, facility, concession, immunity or exemption,
      in the course of proceedings of cases.
10.   Locus standi to make plaint: A person who desires to make a claim
      by filing a plaint in any court, the person shall show his/her locus
      standi by mentioning in the plaint the matter that he/she has right to
      make such a claim or demand or has legitimate interest or concern
      therein or therewith.
11.   Jurisdiction not to be in vacuum: (1) A court or judicial authority as
      specified by law to try, hear and adjudicate any case shall have the
      jurisdiction to try, hear and adjudicate such a case.
            (2)    If no court is specified to have jurisdiction pursuant to
      sub-section (1), the concerned district court shall be deemed to have
      jurisdiction to originally try, hear and adjudicate such a case.
12.   Prohibition on avoidance of decision making: (1) A judge shall
      avoid making decision on the ground that law is inadequate or unclear.
            (2)    In the event of occurrence of the circumstance as referred
      to in sub-section (1), decision shall have to be made based on
      recognized principles of law and justice.



                                       503
13.   Opportunity to be given for compromise or mediation: (1) Prior to
      passing a judgment on any case, the court shall have to give
      opportunity to the parties to compromise such a case or enter into a
      compromise by following the procedures of mediation.
            (2)    If, in giving opportunity pursuant to sub-section (1), if
      the parties agree to enter into compromise or undergo the procedures
      of mediation, the case shall be capable of being settled through
      compromise or mediation, irrespective of the level trying the case.
14.   Principle of res judicata to be followed: In hearing and adjudging a
      case, the same court shall not make hearing and pass a judgment more
      than once in the case on the same matter involving the same plaintiff
      and same defendant.
15.   Right of appeal: Where any case has been originally tried, heard and
      adjudged, a party who is not satisfied with such a judgment shall have
      the right to make an appeal against such a judgment to the appeal
      hearing court from the court that has made such a judgment, in
      accordance with law.




                                Chapter-3
                   Provisions Relating to Jurisdiction
16.   Jurisdiction to be specified: (1) In order to try, hear and adjudicate a
      case, the court shall have jurisdiction to that effect pursuant to law.
            (2)    Any proceeding, hearing or adjudication made in the
      course of a case by a court without jurisdiction shall be void.
            (3)    In passing a verdict, the court shall have to specify in the
      judgment the matter of under which law it has jurisdiction.


                                      504
17.   Jurisdiction of court: The court shall have powers, as provided for in
      law, to try, hear and settle cases, hear appeals therefrom, revise or
      review them.
18.   District court to have jurisdiction: (1) In relation to the cases
      relating to any immovable property, to servitudes, ditches and borders,
      requiring an on-site examination or inquiry by the nature of the
      subject-matters of cases and any cases requiring the examination of
      any land, house or place in view of plaints, the district court of the
      district where such land or house is located shall have jurisdiction to
      try, hear and settle such cases.
            (2)      The concerned district court shall also try, hear and
      adjudicate the following matters, in addition to the cases set forth in
      sub-section (1):
            (a)    A case involving the question of rent, crop or amount in
                   question or relating to the ownership, possession of or
                   entitlement, disentitlement to a property,
            (b)    A case relating to attachment to or preemption of an
                   immovable property,
            (c)    Division of an immovable property,
            (d)    A case relating to furnishing an immovable property in
                   security, mortgaging, possessing and foreclosing such
                   property,
            (e)    A case relating to any concern or condition on an
                   immovable property,
            (f)    A case relating to compensation related with an
                   immovable property.



                                         505
            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
      (2), a partition case shall be tried, heard and settled by the district
      court of the district where the defendant is residing.
19.   District court of district where defendant resides or act done to
      have jurisdiction: (1)     Any case other than those set forth in
      Section 18 shall be tried, heard and settled by the district court in
      which plaint is filed, out of the district court of the district where the
      act is done or the district court of the district where the defendant
      resides.
            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
      "district where the defendant resides" means the district where the
      defendant has abode and also includes, in the case of a legal person,
      the district where the head office of such a person is situate.
            (2)    If both plaintiff and defendant do any general transaction
      in any place within Nepal, other than the territory where the plaintiff
      and the defendant reside, a case relating to such transaction shall be
      tried, heard and adjudicated by the district court in which plaint is
      filed, out of the district court in the territory where the transaction has
      been done or the district court in the territory where the plaintiff
      resides.
            (3)    In filing a case of the matter as referred to in sub-section
      (1), if there are two or more defendants, the case shall be filed in the
      district court of the district where more defendants reside.
            Provided that where the number of defendants residing in more
      than one district is equal, the plaint may be filed in any district court
      of the district where such defendants reside.



                                      506
20.   Jurisdiction over cases relating to transaction carried on abroad:
      Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 18 and 19, where
      there a provision that a case on the matter of general transaction or
      contract done or concluded abroad may be filed in any court in Nepal,
      the district court of the district where the plaintiff or the defendant
      resides shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
21.   Jurisdiction over transaction done abroad Nepalese aircraft and
      ship: The court of Nepal shall, subject to Section 20, have jurisdiction
      to try, hear and adjudicate a case on any transaction done abroad a
      Nepalese aircraft or ship, registered in Nepal in accordance with law,
      while such an aircraft or ship is outside Nepal.
22.   Higher court to have jurisdiction: If a case is filed in both lower and
      higher courts on any matter falling under the jurisdiction of the lower
      court and the higher court pursuant to law, the higher court shall have
      the jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
23.   Court to have jurisdiction: If a case of any matter is filed in both a
      court and other quasi-judicial body in accordance with law, the court
      shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
24.   Jurisdiction over case in which public servant is plaintiff or
      defendant: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Chapter, while lodging a plaint by a public servant in his/her official
      capacity or by a person against a public servant in such capacity, such
      a plaint shall be lodged in the district court of the district where the
      office in which such a public servant is in service for the time being.
            (2)    In making a plaint or submitting a statement of defense
      by a public servant in his/her personal capacity, the public servant



                                       507
      may, in fulfillment of the requirements of laws in force, make or
      submit the same to the district court of the district where he/she in
      service.
            (3)     The court shall file a plaint or statement of defense
      tendered for filing pursuant to sub-section (2) and forward the same to
      the concerned district court.
            (4)     The concerned court shall try, hear and settle the case
      forwarded pursuant to sub-section (3), in accordance with law.
25.   Concerned district court to have jurisdiction: Where any court is
      not specified by law to have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle any
      case, the concerned district court shall have jurisdiction to try, hear
      and settle such case.
26.   Plaint to be maintained in one court only: (1) If a person has filed
      several plaints on the same matter in several courts, the case shall be
      maintained in any one district court with the consent of both parties of
      the case, and information thereof shall be given to the rest courts.
            (2)     If information is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      courts shall annul such plaints.
            (3)     If the parties fail to agree pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      plaint which has been filed earlier in the court shall be maintained,
      and the plaints filed in the other courts shall be annulled.
27.   Jurisdiction of court hearing appeal: If a case is filed in, and tried,
      heard and settled by, any court in accordance with this Chapter, the
      court hearing appeals against the orders or judgments made by such a
      court shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle appeals, as provided
      for in law.



                                         508
                              Chapter-4
             Provisions Relating to Preparation of Deeds
28.   Requirement to be met in preparing deeds: (1) In preparing             a
      deed, it shall be so prepared, clearly setting out the matter on which it
      has to be prepared, by printing, typing or hand writing that it does not
      contain any errors and overwriting and cross-out and it has to be
      signed by the actor or authority concerned with that deed.
            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
            (a)    The expression "deed" means any of the following deeds:
                   (1)   A deed on any kind of general transaction carried
                         on household, transfer of a movable or immovable
                         property or on mortgage or pledge of a property,
                   (2)   A contract,
                   (3)   A deed of authorization, power of attorney, deed of
                         consent or other paper of similar nature,
                   (4)   Any deed to be submitted to a government office
                         or corporate body,
                   (5)   Any kind of deed, including a plaint, statement of
                         defense, memorandum of appeal, petition and
                         petition, to be submitted to the court,
                   (6)   Any deed to be issued by a government office or
                         corporate body,
                   (7)   Any other deed of similar nature.
            (b)    The term "actor" means a person who has responsibility
                   by the contents of a deed to sign the deed.




                                       509
      (c)    The term "government office" means a court, office of
             the Government of Nepal, constitutional body, an office
             receiving or involving budget or grant from the
             Government of Nepal, or a local body.
      (d)    The expression "corporate body" means a body and
             company that is fully or partly owned by the Government
             of Nepal, and includes a university and community
             school.

      (2)    If, in preparing a deed as referred to in sub-section (1), an
error is made or contents are to be corrected for any reason, correction
shall be made by so crossing out the sentence, word, figure or letter
that has to be corrected that such a sentence, word, figure or letter
seems to have been otherwise and writing such a sentence, word,
figure or letter as required to have been mentioned over or under the
cross-out, and the concerned actor shall sign each place where such
correction is made.
      (3)    If correction cannot be made by way of cross-out
pursuant to sub-section (2) or despite that such correction can be made,
the corrected content would create confusion or doubt, another
separate deed shall be prepared instead of such a deed.
      (4)    In setting down any amount in a deed as referred to in
sub-section (1), the amount shall be set down in both figures and
words.
      (5)    If, in setting down any amount pursuant to sub-section
(4), there is a difference between the figures and the words, the
contents set down in the words shall be valid.


                               510
29.   Requirements to be met while signing deeds: (1) In signing a deed
      or causing it to be signed, a person who can write shall write his/her
      name and sign it, and a person who cannot write shall put his/her
      thumb impressions on it.
            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
      signing any of the following deeds, a person who can write shall put
      both of his/her signature and thumb impression on it and a person who
      cannot write shall put thumb impressions on it and make signature in
      such a manner as to prove that such a deed has been executed and
      signed by the actor:
            (a)    A deed related with the transfer of title to, gift, donation,
                   pledge or mortgage of, a movable or immovable property,
            (b)    Power of attorney/authorization letter to be submitted to
                   a government body or body corporate,
            (c)    A deed of partition, will, exchange to be executed
                   between coparceners,
            (d)    A deed of separation of bed and board or joining of bed
                   and board to be executed between coparceners,
            (e)    A deed relating to adoption,
            (f)    A separate receipt executed upon receiving repayment of
                   loan, without making an endorsement on the reverse side
                   of a bond,
            (g)    A deed of loan, pledge, mortgage and also sub-mortgage,
                   deed of term of repayment, guarantee letter and bond,
            (h)    Bailment contract,
            (i)    Unsecured bond (Kapali).



                                     511
              (3)   In signing, pursuant to sub-section (1), a deed to be
      issued by a government office or corporate body shall be signed by
      the concerned authority indicating his/her name and designation, and
      such a deed shall also contain the date of its issued.
30.   Requirements to be met while putting signature on deeds: (1) A
      person who can write shall have to write his/her full name, surname
      and address in a deed, and sign the deed.
              (2)   In putting signature pursuant to sub-section (1), the other
      places may be initialed by putting the full signature on the principal
      pace of signature.
              (3)   In putting signature pursuant to sub-section (1), if a deed
      of the same matter contains more than one page, the actor shall be
      required to sign it shall so initial the top and bottom of each page that
      no content can be added to or deleted from the deed and put the full
      signature on the principal place of signature.
              (4)   If any deed is affixed or joined, the actor shall initial each
      joint and place of such affixation or joint.
31.   Requirements to be met while putting or causing to be put finger
      impressions on deeds: (1) In putting or causing to be put finger
      impressions on a deed, the person putting finger impressions on the
      deed shall put impressions of the thumb in his/her right hand on the
      deed.
              (2)   In putting or causing to be put finger impressions
      pursuant to sub-section (1), if the person putting finger impressions
      has no thumb in the right hand or despite having such a thumb, the
      wheel like and conch like marking therein are not clear, the person



                                       512
shall put the impression of thumb in the left hand, if the person has no
thumb in both hands or despite having them, the wheel like and conch
like marking therein are not clear, the person shall put impression of
another figure having clear marking, in the right or left hand, on the
deed, setting out the same reason.
      (3)    In putting or causing to be put impressions of thumbs in
both hands in accordance with law, if the actor has no thumb of any
hand or the conch like marking therein are not clear, the actor shall
put impression of such another finger in the same hand as having clear
marking and the thumb of the hand, in which wheel like and conch
like marking therein are clear.
      (4)    In putting or causing to be put impressions of thumbs of
both hands, the actor shall put the impression of any one such figure
each in the both hands as in which the wheel like marking and conch
like marking are clear if the actor has no thumb in both hands or
despite have the same, the wheel like marking and conch like marking
therein are not clear.
      (5)    In putting, or causing to be put, finger impressions
pursuant to sub-section (4), if one hand has no figure at all or despite
have any figure, the wheel like marking and conch like marking are
not clear, the impression of any such one or two fingers, as required,
in the same hand as wheel like marking and conch like marking in
which are clear shall be put, or caused to be put, on the deed.
      (6)    Except where the impression of any one thumb or both
thumbs is caused to be put while putting, or causing to be put, thumb
impressions pursuant to this Section, in putting, or causing to be put,



                                  513
      the impression of any other figure, the matter that the impression of
      other figure has been put or caused to be put for the reason that the
      actor has no such a thumb or the wheel like and conch like marking
      therein have not appeared clear shall be set down in the concerned
      deed.
32.   Signature to be put: If in relation to a deed on which the impressions
      of the thumbs of both hands and signature of the actor who is to put
      thumb impression have to be put or on which the finger impressions
      and signature of the actor have to be put in accordance with law, the
      finger impressions cannot be put on the deed owing to the
      circumstance set forth in Section 31, and the actor can make signature
      in writing, the actor shall put or cause to be put only his signature in
      writing on the deed, and the deed shall contain the matter that figure
      impression could not be put on the deed for the reason that the actor
      has no figure in both hands or despite having one, the wheel like and
      conch like marking therein are not clear.
33.   Deed to be valid: Where a deed is signed or on which finger
      impression is put on it, such a deed shall be valid for any purpose and
      enforced in accordance with law.
34.   Deed to be caused to be signed by guardian or curator: (1) In
      signing a deed or causing it to be signed by an actor in accordance
      with law, if the actor is not able to make signature pursuant to Section
      30 and, in putting or causing to be put figure impressions on the deed
      pursuant to Section 31, the actor has no figure in both hands or despite
      having one, the wheel like and conch like marking therein are not
      clear, a person who can be a guardian or curator of such an actor shall



                                     514
      put signature on the deed on behalf of, and in the presence of, that
      actor in accordance with law.
            (2)    In signing or sealing a deed or causing it to be signed
      through a person who can be a guardian or curator pursuant to sub-
      section (1), the deed shall contain the matter that the guardian or
      curator has signed it on behalf of, and in the presence of, that actor for
      the reason that the actor has no figure in both hands or despite having
      one, the wheel like and conch like marking therein are not clear.
35.   Procedures to be fulfilled in executing deed by person who is not
      able to seal it: (1) If a person who is not able to seal a deed by
      putting finger impressions on it for the reason that he/she has no
      finger in both hands can make signature, the deed certifying authority
      shall cause him/her to put his/her signature only on the deed and
      certify the deed, stating that mater in any part of the top of the deed.
            (2)    In executing a deed by a person who is not able to seal
      the deed by putting on it the figure impression by the reason that
      he/she has no finger in both hands and who is not also able to make
      signature, the deed shall be certified, in witness of his/her wife or
      husband living in an undivided family and, failing such a person, in
      witness of the guardian or a person who has the first and foremost
      right in the order of priority to inherit him/her, setting down in it the
      reason which the figure impression and signature of the deed
      executing person have not been put on it.
36.   Requirements to be met in executing deed on behalf of persons of
      special group: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
      this Chapter, in executing a deed on behalf of a blind or dumb, it shall



                                      515
      be executed in presence and witness of a person who can be his/her
      guardian living in an undivided family or failing such a guardian, a
      person who can be his/her curator, stating that the deed corresponds to
      what has been expressed or gestured by such a blind or dumb.
            (2)    In submitting any deed to a government office or
      corporate body or preparing deeds such as a plaint, statement of
      defense, memorandum of appeal or petition, such a deed shall be filed
      or submitted, by getting it certified to that effect by the chief of the
      office or body to which such a deed is to be produced or by a person
      authorized by the chief to that effect.
37.   Identification details to be set down: (1) In preparing the deeds
      referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 29, the deeds shall be
      prepared clearly setting down the identification details of the main
      actors related with the deeds.
            (2)    In setting down the identification pursuant to sub-section
      (1), there shall be set down the three-generation details of the
      concerned person, namely his/her father's, mother's, grand-father's and
      grand-father's name, his/her wife's or husband's name, his/her
      citizenship number, age, date and district of issue of the citizenship
      certificate, his/her permanent address, and in the case of such a person
      being a foreign citizen, details of his/her citizenship, his/her passport
      number, country of issued of passport and date of issue of passport,
      his/her address and email address.
            (3)    In executing a deed in presence of a guardian or curator
      pursuant to this Chapter, there shall be set down in the deed the
      guardian's or curator's name, surname, address, citizenship number,



                                       516
      and in the case of such a guardian or curator being a foreign citizen,
      his/her passport number and email address.
38.   Details of body corporate to be mentioned: (1) In executing or
      causing to be executed any deed on behalf of a body corporate, the
      deed shall mention details clearly identifying such a body, its
      registration number or place of registered or head office and shall be
      signed, or cause to be signed, by the person authorized to that effect
      by a resolution of the directors thereof.
            (2)    In getting the deed to be signed pursuant to sub-section
      (1), the person to sign the deed on behalf of such a body shall not be
      required to put finger impression on the deed.
            Provided that upon the deed being signed, the seal of such a
      body shall be affixed thereunto.
            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of
      Section 29, in the case of a deed of which a body corporate is the actor,
      it shall not be required to mention the description of three-generation.
39.   Only signature to be sufficient: Notwithstanding anything contained
      elsewhere in this Chapter, in signing any deed by any public office-
      bearer in that capacity, by an office-bearer of a body corporate in that
      capacity, in preparing a report of any study, or research, examination
      or inquiry or signing or sealing any deed other than a deed required by
      law to bear finger impressions, the finger impressions shall not be
      required to be put thereon, and if the deed is duly signed by the
      concerned person, such a deed shall be deemed to have been duly
      executed.




                                      517
40.   Seal to be put in indelible ink: (1)     In putting or causing to be put
      finger impressions pursuant to this Chapter, the wheel like or conch
      like figure shall be colored in indelible ink or otherwise and shall be
      impressed on the deed.
            (2)    In putting signature by a person required to make it, the
      person shall put the same in indelible ink.
41.   Place and date to be set down while preparing deed: In preparing a
      deed as referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 29, the deed shall
      contain the main contents thereof and state at the end the place and
      date of execution of such a deed.
42.   Deed to be witnessed: (1) A deed required to be prepared in witness
      of persons pursuant to law shall be prepared in witness of at least two
      persons who are competent to enter into a contract and state that the
      act, transaction as referred to in the deed have been carried out.
            (2)    A deed prepared pursuant to this Chapter shall state the
      details setting out the identity and address of witnesses as mentioned
      in sub-section (1) and be signed or sealed, or caused to be signed or
      sealed, pursuant to this Chapter.
            (3)    If a deed prepared pursuant to this Chapter has been
      written by the actor himself or herself, the deed shall state that matter
      and if it has been drafted by another person, it shall state that matter
      and signed by the writer, indicating his/her identity.
            (4)    If any license has to be obtained in accordance with law
      in order to prepare a deed, the writer preparing the draft pursuant to
      sub-section (3) shall also state the details thereof.




                                       518
43.   Deed failing to meet requirements to be invalid: (1) A deed
      prepared without fulfillment of the requirements pursuant to this
      Chapter shall not be valid, and no right, claim, interest or concern of
      any person shall be enforced by such a deed.
              (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
      deed may be recognized in the following circumstance by imposing a
      fine not exceeding two hundred rupees in view of the nature of the
      deed.
              (a)   Where a person who can write has not put finger
                    impression but has put signature duly or where the person
                    has put finger impression but the impression is not
                    legible,
              (b)   Where a person who can write has not put signature but
                    has put finger impression only,
              (c)   Where the deed at its end containing the date is not
                    signed or sealed by the actor,
              (d)   Where a deed is not witnessed or despite being witnessed,
                    it does not bear the signature of the witness,
              (e)   Where the name, surname, address and designation have
                    to be set down, any or all of the surname, address and
                    designation has or have been omitted.
44.   Deed executed by actor to be valid: Notwithstanding anything
      contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if it is proved that a deed
      required to be signed by the actor has been hand written by the actor
      himself or herself, such a deed shall be valid in accordance with law.




                                      519
45.   Deed may be registered upon making addition legibly: (1) If some
      addition and cross-out is made and contents added in legible manner
      in a deed tendered for registration in a government office or body
      corporate, in getting it to the signed, there shall be made a remark in
      the deed that such addition and cross out have been made or letters
      added therein and certified to that effect and then the deed shall be
      registered.
            (2)     In the case of a deed written by a government office or
      body corporate and tendered for registration, the chief of such office
      or body or the person authorized by the chief may sign it and register
      it.
            (3)     If any deed does not meet the requirements pursuant to
      sub-section (1) or (2) and cannot be registered, the chief of office or
      body shall, for the reasons why the deed cannot be registered to be
      clearly recorded, write such reasons on the reverse side of the deed,
      date and sign it and return it, by getting a receipt from the person
      tendering it for registration.
            (4)     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, no document registered or filed in a government office or
      body corporate shall be returned to any one nor shall it be exchanged
      nor shall any figure, letter be deleted, crossed out or altered.
46.   Copies of deeds to be provided: (1) If any person who has concern
      in a case or his/her law practitioner makes a petition for a copy of a
      document contained in the case-file including the plaint, statement of
      defense, memorandum of appeal, petition, deed related with the




                                       520
evidence produced by the plaintiff or the defendant and the judgment,
the court shall provide it as soon as possible.
      Provided that any law practitioner may obtain a copy of a
judgment.
      (2)    Except as provided for in sub-section (1), any person
who is concerned with any deed maintained with a government office
or body corporate may make a petition, setting out the matter that the
person is concerned with the deed, to the concerned government
office or body corporate for a copy of the deed.
      (3)    In providing a copy pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
there shall be charged the fees of five rupees per page of A-4 size
where the concerned person himself or herself has copied a deed or
made a photocopy of the same and the fees of ten rupees per page of
A-4 size where the court or other government office or body corporate
has itself made a copy and provided it.
      (4)    In providing a copy pursuant to sub-section (3), the
matter that the copy has been provided at the request of the person
who has applied for the same and the copy corresponds to the original
shall be mentioned on the first page of the copy and the copy shall be
certified by the competent authority.
      (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the concerned court, government office or body corporate
shall not be compelled to provide the copy of a deed that has to be
kept confidential or that has not to be made public pursuant to law or
that has been ordered by a court not to be made public.
                            Chapter-5



                                521
                    Provisions Relating to Limitation
47.   Plaint to be made within limitation: (1) If any certain period of
      time is specified by law to make a plaint in, or submit any kind of
      claim, to any court on any matter, such a period of time shall be
      deemed to be a limitation.
            (2)    Where the limitation is provided for pursuant to sub-
      section (1), a plaint shall be made within such a limitation.
            (3)    If any person shows up in the court to make a plaint in
      contravention of sub-section (2), his/her plaint shall not be filed, and
      even if such a plaint happens to have been filed for any reason, such a
      plaint shall be annulled.
48.   Plaint may be made failing provision of limitation: If no limitation
      is provided by law for the filing of a plaint on any matter, a plaint may
      be made within six months after the date of occurrence of the cause of
      action.
49.   Commencement of limitation: (1) If there arises a circumstance to
      make a plaint on any case, the limitation shall be deemed to have
      commenced in accordance with that law which provides for limitation.
            (2)    If there is no legal provision in relation to the
      commencement of limitation pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      limitation shall be deemed to have commenced from the date on
      which the cause of action has arisen.
50.   Plaint may be made from the date of knowledge: (1) Where a plaint
      has to be made as a result of deception, forgery, fraud or conspiracy or
      for similar other reason or the limitation gets expired in a
      circumstance where any act is done clandestinely and it is not thus




                                      522
      known then, and the concerned person shows up to make a plaint
      setting out that matter within thirty five days after the date of
      knowledge of that matter by him/her, the court shall file and try such a
      plaint subject to this Chapter, Notwithstanding anything contained in
      Section 48 or 49.
             (2)    In the case of a plaint to be made by the Government of
      Nepal or any body corporate for the purpose of sub-section (1), the
      date of knowledge by the concerned office or body corporate shall be
      deemed to be the date of knowledge by the plaintiff.
51.   Plaintiff may be filed after leave: (1) If the deadline of limitation
      falls on a public holiday and a plaint is tendered for filing on the first
      day on which the court opens immediately after such a holiday, the
      court shall file the plaint.
             (2)    If a plaint is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the plaint
      shall be deemed to have been filed within the limitation.
             Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "public
      holiday" means the holiday for whole or half day as notified as such
      by the Government of Nepal that the government offices or courts
      remain closed on such a day.
52.   Limitation of minor or person of unsound mind: (1) If any person
      who has to make a plaint is a minor, the limitation shall be deemed to
      have commenced in his/her case from the day on which he/she attains
      majority.
             (2)    If any person who has to make a plaint becomes of
      unsound of mind prior to the commencement of limitation, the




                                      523
      limitation shall be deemed to have commenced in his/her case from
      the day on which he/she becomes of sound mind.
             (3)    If any person becomes of unsound mind after the
      commencement of limitation, if the person makes a plaint within the
      period of limitation that remains after deduction of the period during
      which he/she becomes of unsound mind, the plaint shall be deemed to
      have been made within the limitation.
             Provided that the period of limitation that remains after the
      person who was of unsound mind has become of sound mind is less
      than fifteen days, the period of fifteen days shall be deemed to be the
      remaining term of limitation.
53.   Commencement of limitation of heir: (1) If a minor or a person of
      unsound mind who is to file a plaint dies before the minor becomes
      major or the person becomes of sound mind, his/her heir may make
      the plaint within the limitation from the date on which he/she dies.
             (2)    If a minor becomes major and then dies, his/her heir may
      make a plaint within the remaining period of limitation when the
      remaining period of limitation is thirty five days or more, and within
      thirty five days if he/she dies when the remaining period of limitation
      is less than thirty five days.
             (3)    If a person of unsound mind becomes of sound mind and
      then dies, his/her heir may make a plaint within the remaining period
      of limitation when the remaining period of limitation is thirty five
      days or more, and within thirty five days if he/she dies when the
      remaining period of limitation is less than thirty five days.




                                       524
54.   Plaint by guardian: Notwithstanding anything contained in Section
      52 or 53, if there is a guardian of a minor or a person of unsound mind,
      as provided for in law, the guardian may make a plaint within the
      limitation as referred to in this Chapter.
55.   Limitation not to be postponed: Notwithstanding that any of the
      persons who are to make a plaint jointly is a minor or a person of
      unsound mind, the limitation shall not be postponed in the case of the
      other persons.
            Provided that such a minor or person of unsound mind may
      make a separate plaint subject to Section 53 after he/she becomes a
      major or a person of sound mind.
56.   Limitation in relation to transaction carried on abroad: If there is
      a provision in law or contract that a plaint may be made in any court
      of Nepal in relation to any act, action or transaction done or taken in a
      foreign country, such a plaint may be made subject to this Chapter as
      if such an act, action or transaction were done or taken within Nepal.
57.   Limitation of plaint lodged in court without jurisdiction: If any
      person lodges a plaint in any court in accordance with law, it appears
      from the statement of defense submitted by the defendant or otherwise
      that the court has no jurisdiction to make decision on such a plaint, the
      limitation for lodging a plaint by the concerned person shall be
      deemed to have commenced from the date on which such a court ends
      the proceeding thereon.
      Provided that,
            (1)    Where the court has made a endorsement at the time of
                   lodging a plaint that it has no jurisdiction, the limitation



                                      525
                   for lodging plaint pursuant to this Section shall not be
                   extended by the reason only that the court without
                   jurisdiction has proceeded with,
            (2)    After the court in which a case has been filed knows that
                   it has no jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case,
                   nothing shall be deed to preclude, merely by the reason
                   that such a court has not settled the plaint, the concerned
                   person from lodging a plaint in the competent court
                   within the limitation as provided in law,
            (3)    Where a plaint is made, lying as to the limitation, after
                   the expiration of the limitation in accordance with law,
                   the jurisdiction cannot be established merely by the
                   reason that the plaint has been filed.

58.   Limitation not to be expired: If the limitation has expired with a
      person being unable to file a plaint within the limitation owing to the
      existence of the following force majeure event (circumstance beyond
      control) and the concerned party tenders a plaint for filing within the
      following period, setting out that matter, the court shall,
      notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, file and
      proceed with such a plaint, subject to Section 59:
            (a)    If the concerned person himself or herself has to observe
                   obsequies by the reason of someone's death, seven days,
                   excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
                   completion of obsequies,




                                     526
            (b)    If the concerned person is a woman has delivered a child,
                   thirty days, excluding the time required for journey, after
                   the date of delivery,

             (c)   If motor vehicles have not plied because the route has
                   remained closed because of flood, landslide and snow-
                   fall or declaration of curfew or otherwise, ten days,
                   excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
                   resumption of such a route or movement of motor
                   vehicles,

            (d)    If the concerned person has been abducted or taken
                   hostage by another person, seven days, excluding the
                   time required for journey, after the date of release from
                   such abduction or hostage taking,

            (e)    If a divine or natural calamity such as earthquake has
                   occurred, ten days, excluding the time required for
                   journey, after the date of occurrence thereof.

59.   Evidence of reason for expiration of limitation to be submitted:
      (1)   In making a plaint pursuant to Section 50 or 58, the reason for
      being unable to make the plaint within the limitation shall be set out in
      the plaint or in a separate petition, and such proof or evidence as
      required to prove the same shall also be produced.

            (2)    If a person who is not able to produce a proof or evidence
      of the reason why the person has not been able to lodge a plaint within
      the limitation at the time of making plaint pursuant to sub-section (1)
      makes a request for a time-limit for the production of such a proof or



                                     527
      evidence, the court may give such a time-limit as it deems appropriate,
      but not exceeding twenty one days after the date of filing of the plaint,
      for the production of such a proof or evidence.

60.   Limitation to commence from date of approval: If any law
      provided that approval of any one has to be obtained in accordance
      with law prior to making a plaint against any person, organization or
      office-bearer, the limitation for making a plaint by the concerned
      person on that matter shall be deemed to commence from the date of
      notice of such approval received by that person.

61.   Limitation not to be computed pending specification of authority:
      If the Government of Nepal or any other body or office-bearer has
      authority to specify the authority, court or body to adjudicate a case
      under any law and if such authority, court or body is specified within
      the limitation, a plaint has to be lodged accordingly, and if such an
      authority, court or body is not so specified, a plaint has to be lodged
      within a period of fifteen days, under the relevant law, after the date
      of specification of such an authority, court or body.

62.   Computing of period of limitation: (1) If the period of limitation is
      specified on day counting basis, the number of days so specified shall
      be computed on the day counting basis.

            (2)    In computing days pursuant to sub-section (1), the period
      of limitation shall be fixed by reckoning days from the following day
      of the day of commencement of limitation.




                                     528
      (3)   If the period of limitation is specified in months, the
number of months as so specified shall be reckoned on the basis of the
first day of months irrespective of the days making months.

      (4)   If the period of limitation is specified in years, the
number of years as so specified shall be reckoned treating a period of
twelve months as one year.




                              529
                                      Chapter-6
                           Provisions Relating to Court Fees

63.   Payment of court fees: (1) In lodging a plaint or memorandum of
      appeal to the court and making a counterclaim in the court, the court
      fees shall be charged.
               (2)   Except in the case referred to in sub-section (1), if an
      order is made to make a review or revision on a petition made for the
      review or revision of any case, the court fees shall be paid for the
      review or revision of the case, as the case may be.
               Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "court
      fees" means the fees to be charged while lodging a plaint or
      memorandum of appeal or a petition for the review or revision of a
      case, and includes the fees payable by a person who makes a counter-
      claim.
               (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
      (2), no court fees shall be charged pursuant to this Chapter in the case
      of a case in which the Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or a case to
      be heard and adjudicated by a local body in accordance with law or
      proceeding to be carried out by a body specified by the Government
      of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal gazette.
64.   Case not to be heard without payment of court fees: (1) No person
      may lodge a plaint, memorandum of appeal or make counterclaim or
      petition for the review or revision of any case without payment of the
      court fees charged pursuant to this Chapter nor shall such a plaint,
      appeal or petition be entertained.



                                      530
             (2)    Except as mentioned elsewhere in this Chapter, a plaint,
      memorandum of appeal or petition for the review or revision of a case
      without payment of the court fees shall be dismissed.
65.   Cases may be heard without collection of court fees: (1)
      Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 64, in the following
      circumstance, the judge may, by executing a memorandum with the
      reasons, make an order to file a plaint, memorandum of appeal,
      counterclaim or review or revise a case, subject to the collection of the
      court fees later fully or partly:
             (a)    If a person who is required to pay the court fees makes a
                    petition specifying the reason that he/she is not able to
                    pay the chargeable court fees fully or partly because of
                    being extremely indigent and the judge has any
                    reasonable ground to believe that matter,
             (b)    If it is recommended by the concerned local body that a
                    person who is required to pay the court fees is not able to
                    pay the court fees because that person has no property
                    other than the property subject to the case or if a petition
                    is made by the person stating that matter, and the judge
                    has any reasonable ground to believe that matter.
             (2)    If the judge makes an order to collect court fees later
      fully or partly pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned employee
      shall clearly write how much court fee has been collected and how
      much is outstanding and attach the records thereof with the case-file.




                                          531
            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
      (2), no court fees shall be charged in relation to a case for the use of a
      government or public property.
66.   Price or amount in question of property to be set out: (1) In
      making a plaint, the value or amount in question of the property that is
      claimed or disclaimed by the plaint shall be clearly set out in cash.
            (2)    Except in a case set forth in sub-section (1), where only a
      claim is made that any matter to be done has not been done or any
      matter not to be done has been done or is about to be done, such a
      claim shall also be set out clearly.
            (3)    Where a plaint is made with a claim pursuant to sub-
      section (2) and a decision has to be made allowing the provision of the
      value or amount in question subsequently, the court shall, prior to
      making such a decision, cause the plaint maker to pay the court fees
      according to such a value or amount in question.
67.   Bases for fixation of value or amount in question: For the purpose
      of the payment of court fees, the value or amount in question of an
      immovable property shall be fixed on the basis of the following order
      of priority pursuant to Section 66:
            (a)    Fees fixed by the land revenue office for the purpose of
                   registration,
            (b)    The value fixed, if any, by the Government of Nepal for
                   the purpose of tax,
            (c)    Locally prevailing value.




                                      532
68.   Value or amount in question to be taken as basis while collecting
      court fees: In collecting the court fees, the same shall be collected on
      the basis of the following value or amount in question:
            (a)    Where the right in cash has to be established or claim in
                   cash to be de-established, the figure of the amount in
                   which the right or claim has to be so established or de-
                   established,
            (b)    Where gold or silver has to be provided or claim therein
                   de-established, the figure to be set by the rate fixed by
                   the Nepal Rastra Bank, and failing such a figure, the
                   figure to be set as per the prevailing market rate,
            (c)    Where a movable property other than that set forth in
                   clause (b) has to be provided or released, the figure to be
                   set as per the prevailing market value of that property,
            (d)    Where a security or treasury bill has to be provided or
                   claim in it has to be de-established, the value set by the
                   stock exchange,
            (e)    In the case of a movable property of which prevailing
                   market value is not set pursuant to clause (c), the figure
                   of value or amount in question set by the plaintiff,
            (f)    Where yields of a land are claimed, the figure of yields of
                   the previous year not subject to natural calamities,
            (g)    Where a claim in an immovable property is made or right
                   or claim in such property has to be de-established, the
                   figure of value or amount in question as set by the
                   plaintiff pursuant to Section 66,



                                     533
(h)   Where a claim is made that the yields of land subject to
      natural calamities have not been remitted, the figure of
      yields claimed for remission,
(i)   Where a claim is made for the remission of any thing
      other than the yields of a land, the figure of the thing so
      claimed for remission,
(j)   Where a claim is made for the right of trust, priest,
      Bhandere etc. or a claim therein has to be de-established
      or a claim is made for releasing therefrom, the figure of
      the residual income to be enjoyable upon administering
      the functions of the trust and the figure or amount in
      question of the land as specified where other claim is
      made and the figure of such Khangi income of one year
      as may be enjoyed where the land is not specified,
(k)   Where right in contract amount is claimed or right or
      claim therein has to be de-established, the figure of
      contract of such number of years as for which the
      contract amount is claimed, and where a claim is made
      only for loss in income, the figure of loss in income so
      claimed,
(l)   In the case of a mortgage of an immovable property, the
      figure of the amount in question set forth in the deed,
(m)   Where insolvency or date for repayment has to be
      effected, the figure of the amount in question indicated
      by the debtor,




                        534
            (n)   Where a claim is made for the provision of salary,
                  allowance or installment, the figure as claimed,
            (o)   Where a claim is made for compensation for loss of
                  wages, the figure of the value as claimed,
            (p)   Where a claim is made for a principal, profit, dividend,
                  bonus, donation, gift, interest, house or shop rent or any
                  property, the figure of such a principal, profit, interest,
                  rent or property,
            (q)   Where a claim is made for any compensation, the figure
                  of compensation so claimed,
            (r)   Where a claim is made for act or recovery to be done or
                  made pursuant to a contract, the figure of such act or
                  recovery so claimed to be done or made.
69.   Rate of court fees: There shall be charged the court fees at the
      following rate from the value or figure of the amount in question as
      claimed pursuant to Section 68 or a claim in which is prayed for de-
      establishment, in making a plaint:
            (a)   Two hundred rupees for up to the first two thousand
                  rupees,
            (b)   For up to twenty five thousand rupees, at the rate of four
                  percent for up to the second twenty three thousand rupees,
            (c)   For up to one hundred thousand rupees, at the rate of
                  three percent for up to the third seventy five thousand
                  rupees,




                                      535
            (d)    For up to two hundred fifty thousand rupees, at the rate
                   of two percent for up to the fourth one hundred thousand
                   rupees,
            (e)    For above two hundred fifty thousand rupees, at the rate
                   of one percent for any figure whatsoever thereabove.
70.   Court fees to be charged in lump sum: (1) Notwithstanding
      anything contained in Section 69, the court fees of five hundred
      rupees shall be charged in a case on any of the following matters and
      matters related thereto:
            (a)    Registration or transmission of a land or cancellation of
                   such a registration or transmission,
            (b)    Claim of invoice and receipt,
            (c)    Claim for invalidation of a deed, deed on repayment date,
                   guarantee letter, bond, receipt etc.,
            (d)    Claim for eviction of tenant from a house or land or
                   claim against such eviction,
            (e)    Claim on obstruction with the making of a dam, canal or
                   ditch or carrying of water through such a dam, canal or
                   ditch or on the use of water in defiance of order,
            (f)    Claim for keeping an exit, window or door open or
                   closed, or for making, adding or closing a window, door
                   or veranda,
            (g)    Claim for the issuance of an injunction or mandatory
                   order to refrain, or cause to be refrained, from doing any
                   act or to cause any act to be done or for the withholding
                   of such an order,



                                       536
            (h)   Determination of full competency, semi-competency or
                  incompetency of any person,
            (i)   Divorce,
            (j)   Settlement of relation,
            (k)   Demand for judicial declaration of the death of a person
                  or cancellation of a judicial declaration or claim for
                  amendment thereto,
            (l)   Claim for commencement or non-commencement of
                  insolvency proceeding,
            (m)   Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a trustee,
            (n)   Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a
                  guardian,
            (o)   Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a curator,
            (p)   Claim for usufruct or cancellation thereof,
                  Provided that the court fees shall be charged on the basis
                  of the value, if any, mentioned,
            (r)   Claim for servitude or cancellation thereof.
            (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      the court fees of one thousand rupees shall be charged on the
      following cases:
            (a)   Claim for the ascertainment or provision of a partition
                  share in the property subject to partition,
            (b)   Voidance of a deed or document.
71.   Special provision relating to collection to court fees: (1)
      Notwithstanding anything contained in section 70, the court fees shall
      be charged as follows on the following cases:



                                    537
             (a)   The court fees pursuant to Section 68 where the right in
                   any property has to be established or de-established from
                   the plaintiff's or appellant's pleas,
             (b)   Where an inventory of property is not submitted along
                   with a plaint on the partition case and the amount in
                   question of the property is ascertained as set forth in an
                   inventory submitted along with a statement of defense or
                   required by the court, the court fees as per the figure of
                   such an amount in question,
             (c)   Where a plaint is made claiming both principal and
                   interest, the court fees of the figure of interest accrued up
                   to the date of filing of plaint,
             (d)   Where the judgment decrees the recovery of interest as
                   well, the court fees of the figure of interest accrued from
                   the date of filing of plaint to the date of the judgment.
             (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      where the value or amount in question is set out in any case, the court
      fees shall be charged on the basis of the value or amount in question
      as mentioned in the other Sections of this Chapter and the court fees
      of one thousand rupees shall be charged, subject to Section 70, in any
      other case whatever in which the value or amount in question is not
      set out.
72.   Value of previous day on which case is filed to be set: (1) In setting
      the value of any property for the purposes of the court fees pursuant to
      this Chapter, the value shall be set taking as the basis the value of the




                                      538
      property prevailing on the previous day of the day on which the case
      is filed.
73.   Court fees chargeable on making appeal: (1) Irrespective of the
      level in which an appeal is made in a case in which the value or
      amount in question is set out, there shall be charged the court fees at
      the rate of fifteen percent of the court fees chargeable while filing a
      plaint, up to the extent to which appeal is made upon being unsatisfied.
             (2)   In making an appeal at any level in a partition case in
      which the amount in question is not set out, there shall be charged the
      court fees equal to the court fees chargeable while filing the plaint.
             (3)   Where an appeal is made to the second layer court
      against the appeal judgment made by the first layer court hearing
      appeal, there shall be charged the court fees at the rate of fifteen
      percent of the court fees chargeable while filing the plaint, up to the
      extent to which appeal is made upon being unsatisfied.
74.   Court fees chargeable for making review or revision of case:
      Where, on a petition made for the review or revision of any case in
      accordance with law, an order is made to review or revise the case,
      there shall be charged the court fees at the rate of fifteen percent of the
      court fees chargeable while filing the plaint, up to the extent to which
      the pray is made to have a review or revision upon being unsatisfied.
75.   Payment of court fees, penalty and fine: (1) In making an appeal by
      any party of a case against the original judgment or in making an
      appeal to the second layer court hearing appeal against the judgment
      of the first layer court hearing appeal, there shall be paid the court fees




                                      539
      as held to have been provided by the party to the other party in
      pursuance of the judgment.
            (2)    In making a petition by any party of a case for its review
      of revision in accordance with law, there shall be paid the court fees
      charged pursuant to the judgment.
            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Chapter, if any penalty or fine is imposed on any party of a case
      pursuant to the judgment, no memorandum of appeal or petition made
      for the review or revision of a case shall be filed without payment of
      such a penalty or fine or furnishing of security for the same.
76.   Court fees required to be paid in cash: (1) Except as otherwise
      provided for in this Chapter, the court fees shall be paid in cash.
            (2)    If payment of court fees is made to the court pursuant to
      this Section, the concerned employee shall credit the court fees to the
      cash book, duly prepare a receipt thereof in duplicate, give one copy
      to the person making payment of court fees and retain the other copy
      in the concerned case-file.
77.   Shortfall court fees caused to be paid: (1) If it appears, in filing a
      plaint or memorandum of appeal, or from the contents of the plaint or
      memorandum of appeal, that payment of court fees less than the court
      fees chargeable pursuant to this Chapter is tendered, the court shall
      cause the shortfall court fees to be paid immediately.
            (2) If any person, being unable to pay the shortfall court fees
      immediately pursuant to sub-section (1), requests for a time-limit, the
      court shall give the time-limit to the concerned person to pay the
      shortfall court fees within the deadline for making a plaint or



                                      540
      memorandum of appeal if there are seven days to go for such a
      deadline, and, if the deadline is of less than seven days, within seven
      days.
              (3)   If, subsequent to the filing of a plaint or memorandum of
      appeal, the court comes to know in any manner that there have been
      paid or taken the court fees less than the court fees required to be
      collected pursuant to this Chapter or if a complaint is made by any
      person on this matter and the complaint seems to be reasonable upon
      examination of the complaint, the court shall appoint the due date to
      pay the shortfall court fees within seven days if the party is on
      recognizance and issue a summons to pay the shortfall court fees
      within the time-limit of seven days if the party is not on recognizance.
              (4)   If the party fails to pay the court fees within the period
      given pursuant to sub-section (3), such a case shall not be entertained.
78.   To return excess court fees: (1) If, in the course of proceedings of a
      case, it is found on a petition by the party or in any other manner that
      there have been collected excess court fees from any party, the court
      shall return the excess court fees to the concerned party.
              (2)   If it is found in any manner after the judgment on a case
      that there have been collected excess court fees, the concerned party
      may make a petition to the concerned court to get such court fees
      returned to him/her.
              (3)   If, in examining the petition received pursuant to sub-
      section (2), the applicant's demand seems to be reasonable, the court
      shall return court fees to the applicant.




                                      541
79.   Complaint may be made on court fees specified by court: (1) A
      person who is not satisfied with the court fees specified by the court
      pursuant to this Chapter may make a complaint to the judge of the
      same court within three days if the payment of court fees has not been
      made yet and within seven days prior to the judgment on the case
      where the payment of court fees has already been made.
            (2)    If, in examining the complaint received pursuant to sub-
      section (1), it appears that there have been collected excess court fees,
      the concerned judge shall make an order to return the excess court
      fees, and the employee who has so collected the excess court fees may
      be liable to departmental action.
            (3)    If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (2), the
      content of the complaint is held to be false, the person making such a
      complaint shall be liable to a fine at the rate of fifteen percent of the
      figure of the claim against the collection or specification of such
      excess court fees.
80.   Punishment for collection or payment of less court fees: (1) The
      concerned party may make a complaint to the court where the case is
      sub judice about the reduction of the value or amount in question with
      intention to pay less court fees.
            (2)    If, in examining a complaint received pursuant to sub-
      section (1), or in examining the case-file by the court itself despite
      that such a complaint has not been made, it appears that the value or
      amount in question has been reduced with an intent to pay less court
      fees, the court shall fine such a party with fifteen percent of the
      reduced court fees and cause that party to pay the shortfall court fees.



                                      542
             (3)   If, in examining a complaint made pursuant to sub-
      section (1), the complaint is held to be false, such a complainant shall
      be liable to a fine of five percent of the figure as claimed to be
      shortfall.
             (4)   If it appears, from a complaint made by any person or in
      any other manner, that any employee of the court has knowingly
      collected the court fees less than that required to be collected, the
      employee shall be liable to departmental action in accordance with
      law.
             Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, the term
      "knowingly" means the failure to collect the court fees pursuant to this
      Chapter according to such value or amount in question as appeared
      from the contents of the plaint or memorandum of appeal or evidence.
             (5)   Where the final judgment has been passed on the case in
      which less court fees have been collected pursuant to sub-section (4)
      or the time-limit for appeal in such a case has already expired and
      such court fees cannot be recovered from the concerned party, the
      amount in question of the court fees shall be recovered from the
      employee who has so collected less court fees.
81.   Forfeiture of court fees: If the plaintiff or appellant loses the case in
      which court fees are charged or if, upon proceeding with a petition for
      review or revision of verdict, the previous judgment is not upheld, the
      fees paid by him/her shall be forfeited.
82.   Proceedings in cases where case is compromised, dismissed or
      canceled: (1) In executing a deed of compromise in a case filed upon
      full payment of the court fees, the court shall collect half the court



                                     543
fees for the execution of deed of compromise and return the remaining
court fees to the plaintiff or appellant.
      (2)      In executing a deed of compromise in a case filed on the
condition of collection of the whole or any of the court fees
subsequently, the court shall execute the deed of compromise only
after collecting the court fees chargeable pursuant to sub-section (1)
from the plaintiff or appellant.
      (3)      If a case filed upon full payment of the court fees is
dismissed or canceled, the plaintiff or appellant shall not be liable to
any punishment.
      (4)      If a case is dismissed or terminated, the court fees paid
shall not be returned.
      (5)      If a case filed on the condition of collection of the whole
or any of the court fees subsequently is dismissed or terminated, the
remaining court fees shall be recovered from the plaintiff or appellant.
      Provided that in the case of termination of a case, it appears that
the plaint that should not have been filed by virtue of the contents of
the plaint has been filed, the court fees collected in such a case shall
be returned.
      (6)      If a case which has been compromised, dismissed or
canceled in fulfillment of the requirements of law is revived for any
reason on a complaint by the party of case and to be proceeded again,
the party on the complaint of whom the case is to be proceeded again
shall again pay the court fees chargeable pursuant to this Chapter to
the court where the case is sub judice.




                                   544
83.   Recovery of court fees: (1) The winning party of a case in which
      court fees have been paid shall be entitled to recover the court fees
      paid by him/her from the losing party.
            (2)    In making recovering of the court fees pursuant to sub-
      section (1), such recovery shall be made according to such amount in
      question as held to be recoverable from each of them if there are two
      or more defendants or appellants, according to the extent of right or
      claim that has to be de-established from them respectively on the
      matter of de-establishment of right or claim and on pro rata basis from
      the losing defendants or respondents in the other circumstances.
            (3)    Where a plaint has been filed without payment of some
      or whole of the court fees and the plaintiff or appellant wins the case,
      the court fees held to be chargeable shall be recovered from the other
      party as a penalty or fine.
            (4)    If the plaintiff or appellant has made a claim of several
      matters, the plaintiff or appellant shall be entitled to recover the
      chargeable court fees from the other party only according to the extent
      of the claim of that matter as held to be sustained.
            (5)    Where a case has been filed without payment of some or
      whole of the court fees and the plaintiff or appellant loses the case, the
      chargeable court fees shall be recovered from them.
            (6)    If a judgment is passed under which the plaintiff or
      appellant is entitled to recover the court fees pursuant to this Section
      and the defendant or respondent dies prior to the recovery thereof, the
      plaintiff or appellant shall be entitled to recover such court fees from




                                      545
      person who succeeds the inheritance of such a defendant or
      respondent.
            (7)     If in passing a judgment on an appeal or a case for review
      or revision, the appellant or applicant wins the case wholly or party,
      the appellant or applicant shall be entitled to recover from the
      respondent such court fees as held to be chargeable on the extent to
      which he/she has so won.
84.   Recovery of court fees to be made with priority: In making
      recovery of, or collecting, an amount in question, fine, court fees and
      other fees or charges in pursuance of judgment, the court shall first
      recover or collect the court fees.




                                      546
                              Chapter-7
       Provisions Relating to Plaint and Presentation of Claims
85.   Claims to be made: (1) In order to have the matter of a claim made
      by a person in accordance with law enforced by the court, the person
      shall make such a claim to the court.
            (2)       In making a claim pursuant to sub-section (1), there shall
      be filed a plaint by fulfilling the procedures and terms as referred to in
      this Chapter.
86.   Plaint may be made on matter which a person has right in and is
      enforceable: (1) Except as otherwise mentioned in this Chapter, in
      filing a plaint pursuant to Section 85, the plaint shall be filed by a
      person making claims only on the matter which the person has right in
      and which can be enforced in accordance with law.
            (2)       If a plaint is prayed for filing in a manner contrary to
      sub-section (1), the plaint cannot be filed, and even if such a plaint has
      been filed for any reason, it shall be voided, except in the case of a
      plain filed under Section 91.
87.   One plaint may be filed: (1) A person may file only one plaint
      against another person on the matters despite that there are many
      matters of claims of civil nature against such other person.
            (2)       If, instead of making a plaint in a case in which the same
      plaint can be made at the same time, a person files another plaint
      subsequently only after considering the consequences of the plaint so
      filed earlier, such a plaint shall not be entertained.
88.   Number of plaintiff or defendant not to affect: In filing a complaint
      in relation to the claim of any one matter, any one person may file one



                                       547
      plaint against many persons or many persons may file one plaint
      against one person.
89.   Plaint to be filed only once: (1) After a person has filed a plaint
      against any person on a matter in a court, that person shall not file
      another plaint against the same person on the same matter in the same
      court or any other court.
            (2)    If one party files a plaint on any one matter in a court and
      the other party files a plaint on that matter in another court or both
      parties file separate plaints in the same court, the court shall make an
      order to try the case in pursuance of the plaint filed earlier and void
      the other plaints.
            Provided that in cases where plaints may be and ought to be
      filed by both parties in accordance with law, nothing shall prevent the
      hearing of both plaints.
90.   Plaint to be filed within limitation: (1) In making a plaint, the plaint
      shall be filed within the limitation specified by law for the submission
      of claims on the matters as claimed in the plaint.
            (2)    In filing a plaint pursuant to sub-section (1), the plaint
      shall state by what law the limitation, within which it has been filed,
      has been specified.
            (3)    Any plaint tendered for filing in contravention of sub-
      section (1) or (2) shall be endorsed and returned.
91.   Plaint may be filed by any person on dispute involving public
      interest or concern: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
      elsewhere in this Code, any citizen of Nepal may, with the leave of
      the court, make a plaint on a dispute involving the right, interest or



                                     548
      concern of the Government of Nepal or public interest or concern, as
      the case may be.
             (2)   In order to obtain the leave pursuant to sub-section (1), a
      separate petition shall be filed along with the plaint.
             (3)   Decision has to be made on the leave prayed for by a
      petition pursuant to sub-section (1) on the same day of the making of
      petition.
92.   Plaint may be filed to establish right: If the right of any third party
      is also affected as a result of the judgment passed on a case in the
      form of dismissal, repeal or otherwise or of the execution of a deed of
      compromise in accordance with law, such a person may make a plaint
      to void that judgment or deed of compromise and establish his/her
      right, within thirty five days of the date of knowledge.
93.   Plaint may be filed on behalf of legal person: (1) In making a plaint
      on behalf of a body corporate recognized as a legal person in
      accordance with law, the natural person authorized by the decision of
      director or directors of such a body for the purposes of making the
      plaint shall state that matter in, and make, the plaint.
             (2)   In making a limitation pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      plaint shall also be accompanied by a copy of the decision of director
      or directors made in relation to the making of a plaint.
             (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
      (2), in making a plaint on behalf of any office of the Government of
      Nepal, constitutional body or its office or court, the plaint may be
      made by the office-bearer who acts as the administrative chief of such
      an office.



                                      549
94.   Prohibition on lodging plaint on matter adjudged: (1) After a
      judgment is made once on any matter, the same party shall not lodge a
      plaint against the same person on the same matter, instead of making
      an appeal against such a judgment in accordance with law.
              (2)   A plaint filed in contravention of this Section shall be
      void.
              (3)   A judgment made in contravention of this Section shall
      be void.
95.   Matters to be stated in plaint: (1)     In making a plaint, the plaint
      shall be in the format set forth in Schedule-1 and state, inter alia, the
      following matters:
              (a)   Subject matter of the dispute,
              (b)   Defendant's name, surname and address, and telephone
                    number, email, to the extent available,
              (c)   Ground for locus standi to file the plaint under the law,
              (d)   Matters claimed,
              (e)   Limitation,
              (f)   Jurisdiction,
              (g)   Whether plaint has been filed elsewhere on that matter or
                    not,
              (h)   Matter of how the summons/time-limit of plaint has to be
                    delivered to the defendant,
              (i)   Evidence, if any, in support of the claims by the plaint.
              (2)   No plaint made in contravention of sub-section (1) shall
      be filed or entertained.




                                       550
96.   Claims of plaint ought to be clear: (1) In making a plaint, the
      plaintiff shall specifically set out in the plaint what and which claim is
      made in what and which matter (cause of action) and on the basis of
      what and which ground and evidence of such a claim is based and
      present his/her claim or demand before the court.
            (2)    A plaint that does not clearly mention the claim and the
      proceeding that has to be taken by the court pursuant to sub-section
      (1) shall not be deemed to have met the requirement.
97.   Plaint fees: In making a plaint, the plaint fees of two hundred rupees
      shall be charged.
98.   Filing of plaint: (1) If a plaint is tendered for filing, the court shall
      examine whether the plaint meets the requirements pursuant to this
      Chapter or nor and the proof and evidence set forth therein are
      attached or not and file it in the diary book in the form set forth in
      Schedule-2 if the plaint meets the requirements and give the
      concerned party an evidence of the filing of plaint in the form set forth
      in Schedule-3.
            (2)    In producing the copies of the plaint pursuant to sub-
      section (1) for the purpose of its registration, there shall be produced
      two copies if the number of defendant is only one and one copy for
      each of the two or more defendants.
            Provided that despite the number of defendants living in an
      undivided family, only one copy may be produced for such defendants.
            (3)    In producing more than one copy of the plaint, the
      plaintiff shall declare and sign that the copy corresponds to the
      original, and the court shall verify the copy with the original.



                                      551
      (4)    If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaint does not seem to meet the requirements, there shall be made an
endorsement on the plaint setting out the reason for failing to meet the
requirements.




                               552
                              Chapter-8
              Provisions Relating to Service of Summons
99.   Plaint may be delivered to the defendant: (1) If, while filing a
      plaint, the plaintiff wishes to deliver the plaint, accompanied by the
      summons, to the person named as defendant in the plaint on his/her
      own or through his/her law practitioner, the plaintiff shall state that
      matter in the plaint; and if such a provision is made to deliver the
      plaint, accompanied by the summons, pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      plaintiff shall deliver a copy of the plaint, accompanied by the
      summons, to the person named as the defendant within three days
      excluding the time required for journey, after the date of filing of the
      plaint by the plaintiff.
             (2)    Where the plaint, accompanied by the summons, is
      tendered for delivery to the defendant pursuant to sub-section (1) and
      the concerned person so wishes, that person shall receive the plaint,
      accompanied by the summons, and where it is so received, it shall be
      deemed to have been delivered duly.

             Provided that in the case of a legal person, if the plaint,
      accompanied by the summons, is so tendered for delivery, such a
      person shall receive it.

             (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if,
      in delivering the plaint, accompanied by the summons, to a legal
      person, it is delivered to the head office of such a person, it shall be
      deemed to have been duly delivered to the concerned person.




                                     553
           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
     "head office" means the registered office, if any, of a body corporate,
     and failing such an office, the main office carrying on the transaction
     of such a person.

           (4)    If the plaint is received pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     receiver shall give a receipt in the form set forth in Schedule-4.

           (5)    Where the plaint, accompanied by the summons, is
     delivered pursuant to sub-section (2), the plaintiff or the law
     practitioner appointed by him/her shall submit a receipt of the
     acknowledgment thereof to the court where the plaintiff has been filed,
     within seven days after the delivery of the plaint, accompanied by the
     summons.

           (6)    The time-limit for the submission of a statement of
     defense shall be set from the date of receipt of the plaint, accompanied
     by the summons, pursuant to sub-section (5).

100. Issue of summons to defendant: (1) Except in cases where the
     plaintiff himself or herself has delivered the plaint to the defendant,
     the court filing the plaint shall, within three days after the date of
     filing of the plaint, issue a summons to the defendant to submit the
     statement of defense.

           (3)    In serving the summons pursuant to sub-section (2), one
     copy of the plaint filed by the plaintiff in the court and the evidence
     attached therewith shall also be delivered.

101. To give time-limit: (1) If a complaint is lodged, the court shall,
     setting out the matter, give a time-limit of twenty one days, excluding


                                     554
     the time required for journey, to the person against whom the
     complaint has been lodged to appear in the court to defend in relation
     to such a complaint.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
     giving the time-limit to a person who is maintained as the defendant
     by the court pursuant to Section 123, there shall be given a time-limit
     of seven days, excluding the time required for journey.

102. Summons cause to be served: (1) In issuing the summons by the
     court pursuant to Section 101, the concerned officer shall prepare the
     summons or notice in triplicate and sign them, affix the seal of court
     thereunto and cause the same to be served.

           (2)    In issuing the summons in the name of the defendant in
     any case in which a plaint is filed, provision shall be made to serve, or
     cause to be served, the summons, accompanied by one copy of the
     plaint to the person living in an undivided family and one copy of the
     plaint for each defendant in the case of the other defendants.

           (3)    The summons/time-limit issued pursuant to Section 101
     shall be served by delivering it to the defendant or other person, and
     taking a receipt of acknowledgment thereof.

103. Process server to serve summons: (1) The process server shall have
     to serve a summons generally within three days excluding the time
     required for journey, from the date on which he/she received the
     summons from the court.

           Explanation:      For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     "process server" means an employee who is responsible or deputed to


                                    555
     serve the summons issued by the court, by delivering the same to the
     concerned person.

104. Form of summons: (1) In issuing a summons by the court in the
     name of a defendant in accordance with law, it shall be issued in the
     form set forth in Schedule-5.

           (2)     In issuing a summons by the court in the name of a
     person other than a defendant, it shall be issued in the form set forth in
     Schedule-6.

105. Summons deemed to have been served: (1) If summons issued by
     the court is delivered to the concerned person at any time pursuant to
     this Chapter or delivered to his/her address or is brought to his/her
     knowledge in any other manner in accordance with this Code, the
     summons shall be deemed to have been served.

           (2)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
     the person receiving the summons appears in the court and makes a
     petition to receive it in person, the summons shall be delivered to
     him/her in the court, and where the summons is so delivered, the
     summons shall be deemed to have been duly delivered.

106. Procedures relating to service of summons: (1) A court shall have
     to prepare a summons in triplicate and deliver the same to the process
     server.

           (2)     If the summons server personally knows the concerned
     person, he/she may, mentioning that matter, deliver the summons
     received by him/her pursuant to sub-section (1) to the concerned
     person at any place.


                                     556
      (3)    If the concerned person is not found pursuant to sub-
section (2), the summons server shall go to the address of his/her
residence, find out his/her house, rented house and identify the
concerned person and deliver the summons to the concerned person in
presence of the concerned ward chairperson or member or secretary or
any other employee of the ward committee of the concerned local
body and at least two local persons and obtain a receipt thereof,
indicating the date of service.

      (4)    Where the person to whom the summons has been issued
cannot be found, the summons/time-limit shall be delivered to any
other major person living with him/her in an undivided family in
pursuance of the procedures referred to in sub-section (3).

      (5)     Where the concerned person or any major person living
with him/her in an undivided family is not found or, albeit found,
refuses to receive the summons, the summons shall be served by
affixing it to the house or homestead of that person, conspicuously, in
presence of the persons as referred to in sub-section (3), and setting
out that matter in the summons.

      (6)    In pursuing the procedures referred to in sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5), there shall be mentioned on the reverse of the
summons to be submitted to the court which procedure has been
followed to serve the summons by delivering or posting, along with
the date and time of the service of the summons, and the persons
referred to in sub-section (3) shall be caused to clearly sign it at the
time of delivery or posting.



                                  557
         (7)   The summons server shall sign the copy of the summons
served pursuant to sub-section (6) and submit it to the court, along
with a report thereof.

         (8)   Where a summons has been served by affixing it to the
house or homestead pursuant to sub-section (5), the summons server
shall mention the date and time of service thereof on the third copy of
such a summons and deliver it to the concerned local body and take a
separate receipt thereof or the member or secretary or employee of the
concerned local body shall mention that matter on the reverse of the
service and sign and serve it.

         (9)   Where a summons is delivered pursuant to sub-section
(8), the concerned local body shall affix such a summons to its notice
board.

         (10) Even though a copy of the summons affixed to the house
or homestead pursuant to this Section has not been delivered to the
concerned local body or the local body has not affixed the summons
received by it to its notice-board, the summons shall be deemed to
have been served in accordance with law if it has been duly affixed to
the house or homestead of the concerned person pursuant to sub-
section (5).

         (11) Where a summons is to be served on any body corporate
or legal person in relation to any case, the summons shall be served on
the person acting as principal person for the time being at the
registered office, head office or main office of transaction of such a
body or person.



                                 558
      Provided that if such a principal person is not available, the
summons may be served by delivering it to any office-bearer or
employee serving in such an office of such a body or person.

      Explanation:      For the purposes of this Section, the term
"person acting as principal person" means the chief executive office of
a body corporate, and this expression means and includes the
chairperson, vice-chairperson, managing director, executive director,
general manager of such a body or the company secretary of a
company.

      (12) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (10),
in serving a summons in the name of a government office,
constitutional body or court, the summons shall be served by
delivering it to the chief, administrative chief of such an office or any
office-bearer entrusted with such responsibility or an office-bearer
acting for him/her and by delivering the summons to such an office,
body or court, setting out that matter, if any such office-bearer is not
available.

      (13)   In serving a summons in the name of a government
office, constitutional body, court, body corporate or such an office-
bearer or employee in that capacity, the summons shall be served by
delivering it to such an office, body, court or such an office-bearer,
employee or office of such a body corporate.

      (14) If a summons cannot be served pursuant to sub-sections
(10), (11), (12) and (13), the concerned summons server shall give a
report to the concerned court within three days.



                               559
        (15) If a report is submitted pursuant to sub-section (14), the
concerned court shall make an order to serve the summons through
postal service on such an office, body, court or body corporate or its
office-bearer or employee in that capacity.

        (16) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (15), the
concerned court may serve the summons in the name of the office,
body, court or body corporate or its office-bearer or employee in that
capacity by sending a registered letter containing that matter.

        (17) After a return receipt of the summons sent by post
pursuant to sub-section (16) is submitted to the court, the summons
shall, except as otherwise proved, be deemed to have been duly served.

        (18) Where records of houses or block numbers of the persons
residing within the area of any local body have been maintained
systematically or where such persons have consented to the service of
a summons by the court by post in relation to their transaction,
business or any other matter, the court may so serve the summons,
notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section.

        (19) If a person is an office-bearer or employee of any
government office, constitutional body, court or body corporate and a
summons issued in the name of that person cannot be served pursuant
to sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5), the concerned court may, based on
the report of the concerned summons server, make an order to serve
the summons on such a person in accordance with sub-section (13) or
(15).




                               560
           (20) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (19), the
     summons shall be served on the name of the concerned person in
     accordance with that order.

           (21) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if the party and opposite party of a case have provided for
     their respective address of exchanging electronic notice such as email
     and fax to give notice to each other in relation to any document, the
     concerned matter or transaction or send a summons in relation to a
     dispute, the summons may be served through an electronic notice to
     such address.

           (22) If the summons server submits to the concerned court a
     report that a summons could not be served in the name of the
     concerned person despite following the procedures set forth in various
     sub-sections of this Section and the court considers that the contents
     of the report are reasonable, the court may make an order to serve the
     summons in the name of such a person by publishing it in a daily
     newspaper of national circulation.

           (23) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (22), the
     summons shall be served in accordance with that order.

           (24) The concerned person shall bear the expenses incurred in
     the service of the summons by publishing it in a daily newspaper of
     national circulation pursuant to sub-section (22).

107. Summons may be served in the court itself: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained in Section 104 or 105, a summons issued by any




                                    561
court in the name of the following person, by delivering it to such a
person in the court in the following circumstance:

      (a)    If the employee or office-bearer of the concerned court is
             in attendance, while he/she is in the court,

      (b)    If a party is on recognizance in any other case in the
             concerned court, when such a party appears in the court,

      (c)    If there is an attorney representing any party of a case
             that is sub judice in the concerned court, when the
             attorney appears in the court in the course of such
             representation,

      (d)    If the person is a law practitioner who appears in the
             concerned court in the course of law practice, when
             he/she appears in the curt in the course of such practice,

      (e)    If the person is one who appears as a witness, when
             he/she appears in the court in that capacity.

      (2)    If a summons issued by the court in the name of the
person as referred to in sub-section (1) is tendered for delivery to that
person when he/she appears in the concerned court, the person shall
receive the summons.

      (3)    If the person refuses to receive such a summons tendered
for delivery pursuant to sub-section (2), the summons server shall give
a report thereof to the concerned court immediately.

      (4)    If a report is given pursuant to sub-section (3) and the
contents seem to be reasonable, the court shall make an order to



                               562
      prevent that person from making representation in the capacity of
      attorney, taking due date, doing law practice or making deposition in
      the capacity of witness in that court until the person receives the
      summons issued by the court in his/her name.

108. To witness service of summons: (1) The concerned ward chairperson
      or member or secretary of the ward committee of the local body or
      any other government employee and local person in the place where a
      summons has to be served shall, while serving the summons pursuant
      to this Chapter, assist the summons server in the service of such a
      summons, by witnessing the service thereof.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
      summons which has been duly served in fulfillment of the other
      procedures shall not be invalid by the reason only that the concerned
      member, secretary of the concerned local body or other employee has
      not witnessed and cooperated in the service of summons or has
      refused to cooperate in such service.

109. Person failing to assist being liable to punishment: (1) In serving a
      summons sent by the court for service, the concerned member,
      secretary of the concerned local body or other government employee
      or local person, as well, shall render all such assistance as required to
      serve the summons, by searching, showing and identifying the house
      of the concerned person, and witness and sign the service as required.

            (2)    The concerned court may, based on the court of the
      summons server, punish one who fails to render assistance pursuant to
      sub-section (1) with a fine of up to one hundred rupees.



                                     563
110. Examination of summons served: Immediately when a report on the
     service of summons is submitted by the concerned summons server
     after serving it pursuant to Section 105, the concerned office
     employee of the court shall examine whether the summons so served
     has been duly served or not and certify it if it appears to have met the
     requirements and mention the date of its submission to the court and
     record it in the case-file.

111. Requirement to make re-service: (1) If, upon making examination
     pursuant to Section 109, it appears that the summons served has been
     served without in fulfillment of the requirements of law or if, in
     examining it upon a complaint made by any person, it appears that the
     summons has been served unduly or has not been served at all, the
     court shall order the concerned process server or other summons
     server to serve it again in fulfillment of the requirements.

            (2)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), such a
     process server shall serve the summons again pursuant to Section 106.

112. Process server liable to punishment: If the process server fails to
     deliver the third copy of the summons affixed to the house or
     homestead of the concerned person when that person is not found to
     the concerned local body, such a process server shall be liable to a
     fine of up to one thousand rupees for each instance, and the concerned
     court may also make an order also to take a departmental action
     against such a process server employee.

113. Service of summons may be made by delivering it to attorney or
     law practitioner: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section



                                     564
     106, where a person has appointed an attorney to receive a summons
     to be served on that person in accordance with law or appointed a law
     practitioner for that purpose, such a summons may be served on that
     attorney or law practitioner.

           (2)       The summons served on the attorney or law practitioner
     of a party pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be valid as if it were served
     on the concerned party himself or herself in consonance with law.

           (3)       In delivering a plaint accompanied by a summons to a
     law practitioner pursuant to Section 99 or serving a summons/time-
     limit on an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with clauses (c)
     or (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 107 and with this Section, a receipt
     shall be taken from such an attorney or law practitioner in the form set
     forth in Schedule-7.

114. Service of summons in the name of person whose house, address is
     not identified: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 106,
     in issuing a summons in the name of a person whose house, address is
     not identified, the summons may be served by posting it at the place
     where the village, city and street of such a person is set down and on
     the notice-board of the court, setting out the matter if even such
     village, city and street is not identified and publishing it in a
     newspaper to be published in the territory over which the court has
     jurisdiction.

           (2)       If a summons/time-limit is published in a newspaper
     pursuant to sub-section (1), such a summons/time-limit shall be
     deemed to have been served duly.



                                     565
115. Service of summons on person outside territory: (1) In serving a
     summons in the name of a person who is living or residing outside the
     territorial jurisdiction of a case in which case has been filed, a
     required number of copies of the summons, accompanied by the order
     of such a court, shall be sent to the court having territorial jurisdiction
     over the territory where that person is living or residing, and the court
     in that territory shall also effect the service of summons in fulfillment
     of the requirements as set forth in Section 106.

           (2)    The court so serving the summons shall send the
     summons served pursuant to sub-section (1) to the concerned court.

116. One who serves, or causes to be served, unduly or causes
     obstruction being liable to punishment: Based on a report of the
     concerned summons server or a complaint by a person, the court shall
     institute action against the person who does the following act and may
     impose the punishment of a fine of up to ten thousand rupees or
     imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or both on such a
     person:

           (a)    Failing to cause the service of a summons issued by the
                  court without a reasonable reason,

           (b)    Serving or causing to be served a summons upon setting
                  down false matters or making false contents,

           (c)    Making objection or obstruction to the service of a
                  summons,

           (d)    Tearing out or peeling off the affixed summons,




                                     566
            (e)       Failing to render assistance by the office-bearer with duty
                      to assist in or witness the service of a summons.

117. Summons unduly served being liable to be void: (1) A party of a
     case may, at any time prior to the adjudication of the case, make a
     petition to the court claiming that the summons required to have been
     served in fulfillment of the procedures as referred to in this Chapter
     has not been served in fulfillment of such procedures or has not been
     served at all.

            (2)       If the court holds the contents of the petition as referred
     to in sub-section (1) to be reasonable, the court may make an order to
     void the summons served unduly and re-serve the summons or order
     the concerned party to receive the summons from the court.

            (3)       Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
     (2), if, in examining a summons served pursuant to this Chapter, it
     appears that the summons has been served without fulfilling the
     requirements, the court shall void such a summons and cause the
     summons to be served again in fulfillment of the requirements.

118. Appeal equivalent to statement of defense may be made: (1)              A
     person who is named as a defendant in the plaint may make an appeal
     equivalent to the statement of defense to the concerned court hearing
     appeal, within thirty five days of the date of knowledge but not later
     than six months of the date of ex parte decision by the lower court,
     setting out the matter that such a decision has been made by the lower
     court against him/her for the reason that he/she was not able to make
     defense or to submit a statement of defense in the case as a result of



                                        567
the service of the summons unduly and without fulfilling the
procedures set forth in this Chapter.

       (2)    If an appeal equivalent to the statement of defense is
made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court hearing appeal shall, prior
to hearing the memorandum of appeal, shall decide whether or not the
summons was served duly on the person named as the defendant in
the plaint or on the person maintained as the defendant by the court
pursuant to Section 123.

       (3)    If, on making hearing pursuant to sub-section (2), the
court hearing appeal holds that the summons was not served duly on
the defendant of the case or the maintained as the defendant by the
court pursuant to Section 123, the court hearing appeal shall void the
ex parte decision by the lower court, order the lower court to again
hear and settle the case in accordance with law by maintaining the
memorandum of appeal as the statement of defense, and remand the
case file to that court.

       (4)    If the case-file, accompanied by its order, is received
from the court hearing appeal pursuant to sub-section (3), the
concerned district court shall issue and serve a summons giving seven
days time-limit, excluding the time required for journey, on the
plaintiff within three days of the receipt of such a case-file.

       (5)    If the summons referred to in sub-section (4) is served,
the case shall be heard and adjudicated in accordance with law once
the plaintiff appears within the time-limit or the time-limit expires.

                            Chapter-9



                                568
    Provisions Relating to Statement of Defense and Counterclaim
119. Statement of defense to be submitted: (1) The defendant shall have
     to submit a statement of defense to the concerned court within twenty
     one days after the date of delivery of the plaint to the defendant or the
     date of service of the summons to submit the statement of defense
     pursuant to Chapter 8.
              (2)   Except as otherwise mentioned elsewhere in this Code, a
     statement of defense tendered for submission after the period as
     referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be filed, and the court shall not
     recognize such a statement of defense despite the fact that it has been
     filed.
120. Matters to be set out in statement of defense: In submitting a
     statement of defense, the statement of defense shall be submitted in
     the form set forth in Schedule-8, setting out, inter alia, the following
     matters:
              (a)   The date of service of summons issued for the
                    submission of the statement of defense,
              (b)   The matter to admit or reject the claims of plaint,
              (c)   If the claim of the plaint is denied, reason and ground
                    thereof,
              (d)   The matter of counterclaim, if any, against the plaintiff,
              (e)   Matters concerning claim, if so designed, against locus
                    standi, limitation and jurisdiction of the court,
              (f)   The evidence and pointes of reasons and grounds for
                    substantiating or refuting the claims and pleas set forth in
                    the statement of defense,



                                       569
            (g)    The matter whether order or decision has to be made by
                   the court in accordance with the plaintiff's demand.
121. Submission of counterclaim: (1) In submitting the statement of
     defense, the defendant may admit or rebut the plaintiff's claims.
            (2)    If the plaintiff's claims are refuted or denied pursuant to
     sub-section (1), the reasons and grounds for such rebuttal or denial
     shall be set down.

            (3)    If the defendant wishes to make any claim against the
     plaintiff in the statement of defense as referred to in sub-section (1),
     he/she may make such a claim; and if he/she makes such a claim,
     the/she shall be deemed to have made a counterclaim.
            (4)    The counterclaim as referred to in sub-section (3) shall be
     set down in the statement of defense and be limited to the matters of
     claims by the plaintiff.
            (5)    If a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
     defendant shall, in submitting the statement of defense, produce two
     copies of the statement of defense if the plaintiff is only one and one
     copy thereof for each other plaintiff if there are two or more plaintiffs.

            Provided that it shall suffice to produce only one copy for the
     plaintiffs living in an undivided family despite the number of such
     plaintiffs.

            (6)    If a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
     court fees as referred to in Chapter-6 shall be paid for the same.

            (7)    Out of the two copies of the statement of defense
     submitted pursuant to sub-section (5), the court shall deliver one copy



                                     570
      to the plaintiff making presence on the due date appointed by the court
      immediately after the submission of the statement of defense.

            (8)      Within fifteen days of the submission of the statement of
      defense pursuant to sub-section (7), the plaintiff shall submit a
      defense in writing stating whether he/she admits or rebuts the
      counterclaim to the concerned court.

            (9)      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, where the defendant makes a deposition equivalent to the
      statement of defense in writing before the court and makes a
      counterclaim, a copy of the written record of such a deposition shall
      be provided to the plaintiff pursuant to sub-section (6).

            (10) Where a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (9),
      the court shall order such a party to pay the court fees as referred to in
      Chapter-6 within three days, and in the event of payment of the court
      fees in pursuant of such an order, his/her counterclaim shall be
      entertained.

122. Filing of statement of defense: (1) The statement of defense tendered
      for filing by a person who is named as a defendant in a plaint shall be
      examined and be filed if it is found to be within the time-limit and
      meet the requirements, and a receipt thereof shall be given to the
      concerned party in the form as referred to in Schedule-3 and that party
      shall be held on recognizance.

            (2)      If, in examining the statement of defense pursuant to sub-
      section (1), it appears that it has been tendered after the expiration of
      the time-limit or it does not meet the requirements, there shall be



                                       571
     made an endorsement on the statement of defense, for the reasons to
     be recorded on the statement of defense.

123. Making defendant by the court: (1) If, notwithstanding any a plaint
     has not been filed against any person, it appears that the right, interest,
     claim or concern of that person is affected by trying, hearing or
     settling of any case or it appears the involvement of other person as
     well on the matter of claims by the plaint from the contents of the
     plaint or the statement of defense or it is necessary to enquire any
     person into any matter for any other reasonable reason, the court may,
     for the reasons to be recorded, order to examine such a person.

            (2)   In examining any person pursuant to sub-section (1), a
     summons of seven days shall be served on that person, and if that
     person receives the summons and makes presence, the court shall take
     his/her deposition setting out evidence.

            (3)   If a person examined pursuant to sub-section (3) wishes
     to make a deposition setting out evidence, his/her deposition shall be
     recorded and if that person requests for the submission of written
     response, an order shall be made to submit the written response within
     a reasonable period.

            (4)   If it appears from the deposition or written response as
     referred to in sub-section (3) that such a person has also a concern or
     involvement in the matter of the plaintiff' claims or judgment by the
     court would also affect his/her right, interest, claim or concern, the
     person shall be held on recognizance as if he/she were a defendant.




                                     572
            (5)    If it appears from the written response or deposition
      submitted or made pursuant to sub-section (3) that such a person is
      merely like evidence, it is not required to hold him/her on
      recognizance.

124. Petition for standing as defendant: (1)          If any other person so
      wishes, that person may make a petition to the court to stand him/her
      as a defendant in a case that is sub judice in the court, showing that
      he/she has a right, interest, claim or concern in the case and his/her
      right, interest, claim or concern will also be affected from a judgment
      on that case, within sixty days after the date of submission of the
      statement of defense by the persons named as defendants in that case
      or after the expiration of the time-limit for the submission of the
      statement of defense.

            (2)    If a petition as referred to in sub-section (1) is received
      and the contents of petition seem to be reasonable, the court shall by
      its order maintain that person as a defendant and give information
      thereof to the plaintiff and the defendant of the case.

            Provided that the defendant so maintained shall not be entitled
      to make a counterclaim against the plaintiff.

125. Fees for statement of defense: In submitting a statement of defense,
      there shall be charged the fees of two hundred and fifty rupees.




                                      573
                               Chapter-10

                  Provisions Relating to Endorsement

126. Document to be examined: The concerned officer shall, immediately
     when a plaint or statement of defense tendered for filing in the court,
     or a petition or memorandum of appeal to be filed in the course of
     proceedings of a case is tendered for filing, study such a document
     and examine whether it is in the form set forth in law, is within the
     limitation, falls under the jurisdiction of the court, sets out such
     matters as required to be set out, it contains any error, incompletion in
     writing, presentation or mentioning or any difference between letters
     and figures and whether it does not meet the requirements under the
     law for any reason.

127. To provide opportunity to correct document failing to meet
     requirements: (1) If, in making examination pursuant to Section 126,
     such a document seems to consist of errors such as failing to be in the
     form set forth in law, failing to set out the matters required to be set
     out or containing any error, incompletion in writing, presentation or
     mentioning or any difference between letters and figures and such a
     document can be registered if such errors are corrected and then the
     document tendered for filing, the concerned officer of the court shall
     make endorsement on the document setting out the matters to be
     corrected or made in conformity with the requirements and date the
     endorsement, and affix the seal of court thereunto and return it to the
     concerned person, by taking a receipt thereof.




                                    574
           (2)     If an endorsement is made pursuant to sub-section (1), ,
     the court shall order the filing of such a document if it is tendered for
     filing upon making it meet the requirements within the remaining
     limitation or time-limit, if the limitation or time-limit is remaining for
     more than three days, or within three days after the date of
     endorsement, if the limitation or time-limit is remaining for less than
     three days.

            (3)    If an order as referred to in sub-section (2) is made, such
     a document shall be filed.

128. Endorsement to be made: If, in making examination pursuant to
     Section 126, it seems that such a document cannot be filed because of
     reasons such as being not within the limitation or time-limit, not
     falling within the jurisdiction of the concerned court, not being
     required or allowed to be tried by the court or being contrary to law,
     the concerned officer of the court shall, setting down the grounds and
     reasons for making such an endorsement in that document, endorse
     and date it, affix the seal of court thereunto and return it to the
     concerned person, by taking a receipt thereof.

129. Records to be maintained in court: One copy of the document
     returned pursuant to Section 127 or endorsed pursuant to Section 128
     shall be recorded in the court.

130. Petition against order of endorsement: (1) A party who is not
     satisfied with the matter of endorsement made by the concerned
     officer of any court pursuant to Section 128 may make a petition to
     the judge of such a court and to the court hearing appeal if such an



                                       575
endorsement is made by the judge himself or herself, praying for an
order to file the document submitted by that party.

      (2)    If a petition is made to the judge pursuant to sub-section
(1), the judge shall make an order whether the matter of endorsement
is in conformity with law or not within fifteen days after the date of
making petition.

      (3)    Prior to making an order pursuant to sub-section (2), the
judge may, without examination or not, conduct hearings on the
matter of whether the endorsement is in conformity with law or not,
and if, upon conducting hearings, the endorsement does not appear to
be in conformity with law, the judge shall make an order to file the
document.

      (4)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
endorsement making officer shall, upon receipt of such an order, file
such a document.

      (5)    If, upon conducting hearings pursuant to sub-section (3),
the endorsement appears to be in conformity with law, the judge may,
for reasons to be recorded, dismiss the petition.




                               576
                               Chapter-12

           Provisions Relating to Due Date for Appearance

135. Party or opponent required to appear on due date: (1) Except in
     cases where appearance on the appointed due date is not required or
     where a party is not required by a court order to appear on the
     appointed due date, a case shall be heard, tried and settled by
     requiring each party of the case to appear on the appointed due date.

           (2)    After the examination by the court of evidence of both
     plaintiff and defendant, any party if he/she so wishes may not appear
     on the appointed due date with the leave of the court.

136. Appointment of the same due date for appearance: (1) The          court
     shall appoint the same due date for both plaintiff and defendant
     pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 135 if they are on recognizance.

           (2)    In appointing the due date pursuant to sub-section (1)
     after the filing of the plaint, the date shall be so appointed for the
     plaintiff by calculating the period in which a statement of defense is
     submitted or likely to be submitted, by estimating the time-limit for
     the submission of the statement of defense.

           (3)    If the due date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) does
     not correspond to the period in which the defendant has submitted the
     statement of defense, the due dates subsequent to the submission of
     the statement of defense shall be so appointed that such dates are the
     same for both plaintiff and defendant.




                                    577
137. Appointment of due date by assigning purpose: (1) In appointing
      the due date pursuant to this Chapter, the court shall appoint the due
      date for appearance by setting down in the book of due date and the
      sheet of due date the reason and purpose for which the date has been
      appointed and the proceeding to be carried out on each date.

            (2)    The proceeding specified shall be carried on the due date
      appointed pursuant to sub-section (1).

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
      the specified proceeding cannot be conducted for any reasonable
      ground on the appointed due date or the time does not allow to
      complete the proceeding on such date, the court shall set down the
      same matter in the receipt of due date for appearance, and appoint
      another due date for appearance.

            (3)    The book of due date and the sheet of due date for
      appearance shall be maintained in the forms set forth in Schedule-7
      and Schedule-8, respectively.

138. Not to overlap due date for appearance: (1) If a case has been filed
      by or against a party of a case, other than a case in which an attorney
      has been appointed in accordance with law, in another court that is
      outside fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) of the case in which the
      case has been filed and the party gives information thereof to the court
      in which the case has been filed by making a petition thereto, such
      court shall, while appointing the due date for appearance, so appoint
      such due date as not to overlap with the due date appointed by that
      other court in the case being tried by it.



                                      578
           (2)    If a party who is on recognizance in more than one case
     in which the same party is plaintiff or defendant in the same court
     makes a petition, setting out the matter, to the court for the
     appointment of the same due date, the court shall, as far as practicable,
     appoint the same due date for all cases.

           (3)    If the due date is appointed pursuant to sub-section (1)
     and the party of the case appears before any one section on the
     appointed due date, the party shall be deemed to have appeared on the
     due date for the other cases in the same section.

           (4)    If any party to a case appears on the due date appointed
     pursuant to this Section, he/she shall be caused to sign the receipt of
     the due date and his/her appearance shall then be recorded.

           (5)    If a party does no appear pursuant to sub-section (4), the
     concerned party shall be deemed to have expired the due date, and the
     concerned authority shall certify that matter.

           (6)    The receipt of due date as referred to in sub-section (4)
     shall be attached with the concerned case-file.

           (7)    The receipt of due date as referred to in sub-section (4)
     shall be maintained in the format set forth in Schedule-11.

139. Due date for appearance deemed to have been appointed on the
     following day: If the court remains closed owing to public holiday
     falling on the due date appointed by the court, the due date for
     appearance shall be deemed to have been appointed on the following
     day of the end of the public holiday.




                                    579
140. Requirement to give information in event of person required to
     appear on due date appointed for appearance being held in
     detention: (1) Where a person required to appear before any court on
     the due date appointed for appearance in the course of any case has
     been held in detention for any reason, the concerned party shall give
     information of that matter indicating in which case he/she has been
     held in detention to the court in which he/she has to appear in relation
     to the case.

           (2)      If information of being held in detention is received
     pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned court shall seek from the
     concerned body information as to why he/she has been held in
     detention and how long he/she has to be held in detention.

           (3)      If information is sought pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     concerned body shall give the court information about the reason for
     holding the person in detention and possible days for which he/she has
     to be held in detention, and information to the effect that he/she
     cannot be released from detention if so.

           (4)      If, upon the information received pursuant to sub-section
     (3), the person held in detention is to be released within one month,
     and that person appears before the court within seven days from the
     date of release from detention, excluding the time required for journey,
     the case shall be tried by appointing the due date for appearance in
     accordance with law, as if that day were the date of appearance.

           (5)      If, upon the information received from the concerned
     body pursuant to sub-section (3), the person required to appear on the



                                     580
     due date appointed for appearance remains in detention for a term
     exceeding one month or the day of his/her release from detention is
     not certain or there exists a circumstance that he/she cannot be
     released from detention, it is not necessary to stay the proceeding,
     hearing, trial and settlement of the case.

           (6)    If a person held in detention appoints and send an
     attorney to act on his/her behalf during such period, the attorney so
     appointed may do and take action on his/her behalf.

           (7)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), if
     a case cannot be settled without subpoenaing and examining any party
     of the case, the case may be heard, tried and settled by subpoenaing
     and examining that party in accordance with law.

           (8)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if a party of a case who being on recognizance has been held
     in detention in the course of the proceeding of the case is released
     from detention and appears within seven days, excluding the time
     required for journey, after the date of release, the case shall be tried by
     holding him/her on recognizance.

141. Not to expire appointed due date: (1) Except as otherwise provided
     for in law, where any party to a case is on recognizance in accordance
     with this Chapter, such a party or his/her attorney shall not fail to
     appear on the due date appointed by the court for appearance and
     thereby to expire the appointed due date, by failing to.

           (2)    If any party to a case fails to appear on the due date for
     appearance appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) and expires the same,



                                     581
the following provisions shall apply to the following matters, after the
expiration of the period of the due date for appearance allowed to be
extended pursuant to this Chapter:

      (a)    If the plaintiff expires the due date for appearance after
             the filing of the plaint but prior to the submission of the
             statement of defense, the plaint claim shall be dismissed.

      (b)    If the plaintiff expires the due date for appearance after
             the submission of the statement of defense and it appears
             or is held that the defendant has admitted the plaintiff's
             claims in whole or in part, the court shall pass a
             judgment accordingly to such an extent of admission and
             dismiss the remaining claims.

      (c)    If the defendant does not submit the statement of defense
             or expires the due date for appearance after the
             submission of the statement of defense, the court shall
             examine all proofs and evidence produced by the plaintiff,
             appreciate the proofs and evidence of the plaintiff and the
             defendant and adjudge the case accordingly.

      (d)    If, subsequent to the filing of the plaint or submission of
             the statement of defense, both plaintiff and defendant
             expire the due date for appearance, the case shall be
             dismissed.

      (3)    If a case is dismissed pursuant to clauses (a), (b), (c) or
(d) of sub-section (2), no other plaint claim by the same plaintiff
against the same defendant on the same matter shall lie.



                               582
142. Extension of expired time-limit or due date for appearance:
      Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section 141, if a party
      fails to appear before the court on the time-limit or due date for
      appearance appointed in any case and expires such a time-limit or due
      date owing to a force majeure event, such a party shall be entitled to
      the extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance for a period
      not exceeding twenty one days for two times in maximum.

142. Provisions relating to fixation of instance: (1) In fixing the instance
      where the due date for appearance once appointed and received
      subsequent to the filing of a case is expired by a party to the case, the
      instance shall be fixed by computing only the expired due date for
      appearance but not computing the extended time-limit.

            (2)    In computing days for the extension of the due date for
      appearance expired by the party of a case, provision shall be made to
      have extension by reckoning the days up to the day allowed to be
      extended with effect from the following day of the day of expiration
      of the time-limit or due date for appearance, as the case may be.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if a case is remanded by a higher court to a lower court to re-
      adjudge it or a case suspended is revived, the instance of the time-
      limit or due date for appearance extended previously shall not be
      counted.

144. Extension of expired time-limit or due date for appearance:
      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if any
      party to a case makes a petition to the court where the case has been



                                     583
filed for the extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance
which has been expired owing to the existence of the following
circumstance, and the court holds the petition to be reasonable, the
court shall order the extension of the expired time-limit or due date, as
the case may be:

      (a)    If a person required to appear before the court at the
             time-limit or due date for appearance expires the time-
             limit or due date for appearance for the reason that the
             person himself or herself had to observe obsequies and
             appears before the court within seven days, excluding the
             time required for journey, after the date of completion of
             obsequies, and makes a petition for the extension of the
             time-limit or due date for appearance, the court shall
             extend the expired time-limit or due date for appearance
             for that period.

      (b)    If a woman required to appear before the court at the due
             date for appearance expires the time-limit or due date for
             appearance for the reason that she has delivered a child
             and appears before the court within thirty days, excluding
             the time required for journey, after the day of delivery,
             and makes a petition for the extension of the time-limit or
             due date, the court shall extend the expired time-limit or
             due date for appearance for that period.

      (c)    If a person required to appear before the court at the
             time-limit or due date for appearance expires the time-



                                584
                 limit or due date for appearance for the reason that
                 movement has been difficult because the route has
                 remained closed or motor vehicles have not plied because
                 of a natural calamities such as earthquake, flood,
                 landslide and snow-fall or for other natural calamity and
                 appears before the court within ten days, excluding the
                 time required for journey, after the date of resumption of
                 such a route, and makes a petition, accompanied by an
                 evidence issued by the concerned local body or other
                 competent body, indicating the date of closure of the
                 route and the date of resumption of the route, as for the
                 extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance,
                 the court shall extend the expired time-limit or due date
                 for appearance for that period.

           (d)   If a person required to appear before the court at the
                 time-limit or due date for appearance expires the time-
                 limit or due date for appearance for the reason that the
                 person has been abducted or taken hostage by another
                 person and appears before the court within seven days,
                 excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
                 release from abduction or hostage, and makes a petition
                 for the extension of the time-limit or due date for
                 appearance, the court shall extend the expired time-limit
                 or due date for appearance for that period.

145. Computation of time required for journey: (1) In computing the
     time required for journey, it shall be computed according to the actual


                                   585
     days required to make journey by bus or rail in the case of a place
     where regular transport service is in operation and at the rate of one
     day for every fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) in the case of a
     place where such bus or rail service is not in operation.

           (2)     In computing the time required for journey pursuant to
     sub-section (1), the time-limit of one day shall be given for a distance
     of less than fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh).

           Provided that no time required for journey shall be given for a
     distance of less than fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) in total.

146. Not to settle case until the period allowed to be extended: Even
     though a party to a case fails to appears at the time-limit or due date
     for appearance appointed by the court and expires such time-limit or
     due date, the court shall not try and settle the case pending the
     completion of the period allowed to be extended pursuant to Section
     142 or 144.

147. Government of Nepal not required to remain on recognizance: (1)
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the
     Government of Nepal shall not be required to remain on recognizance
     in a case in which the Government of Nepal, constitutional body or
     court is a plaintiff or defendant in accordance with law.

           Provided that the government attorney shall appear on the day
     of examination of evidence, hearing of the case or on the day ordered
     by the court for the attorney to make appearance to represent such an
     agency.




                                    586
148. Power to try and settle cases at appeal level without holding
     parties on recognizance: Except as otherwise ordered by the court,
     cases at the appeal level may be tried and settled without holding
     parties on recognizance.




                                 587
                                 Chapter-13

                      Provisions Relating to Attorney

149. Appointment of attorney: (1) Any party of a case may appoint a
     representative to carry out any acts that pertain to the case in the court
     on his/her behalf.

           (2)      Where a representative is appointed pursuant to sub-
     section (1), an attorney shall be deemed to have been appointed.

           (3)      In appointing an attorney pursuant to sub-section (2),
     there shall be executed a deed pursuant to Section 151.

           (4)      A party to a case may revoke at any time the attorney
     appointed under this Section by filing a petition before the court or
     may appoint another attorney by executing another deed.

150. Qualification of person to be appointed as attorney: A person who
     possesses the following qualification may be eligible to appointed as
     an attorney:

           (a)      A person who is competent to enter into a contract in
                    accordance with law,

           (b)      A person who is not in default of payment of a
                    government amount in question according to judgment
                    and any such fees, court fees as required to be paid to the
                    court for the execution of judgment or any fine or
                    punishment imposed by the court,



                                      588
           (c)   Any person who has not been sentenced to any offence of
                 forgery, fraud, corruption or offence involving moral
                 turpitude.

                        Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall
                 prevent any party to a case from appointing any person
                 living in an undivided family as his/her attorney.

151. Matters to be set out in power of attorney: (1) A power of attorney
     set down for appointing an attorney pursuant to this Chapter shall set
     out the following matters:

           (a)   Short description of the reason for the appoint of attorney,

           (b)   The full names, addresses, and ages of the persons who
                 appoint an attorney and who are to be appointed as       an
                 attorney,    and   their   citizenship   number   or   other
                 description identifying them,

           (c)   The acts authorized to be done by the attorney,

           (d)   The matter that one who appoints and one who is to be
                 appointed under the power of attorney are not in default
                 of payment of a government amount in question
                 according to judgment and any such fees, court fees as
                 required to be paid to the court for the execution of
                 judgment or any fine or punishment imposed by the court,

           (e)   The venue and date of the execution of the power of
                 attorney.




                                    589
           (2)    The power of attorney shall be executed in the form set
     forth in Schedule-9.

           (3)    The power of attorney as referred to in sub-section (2)
     shall be signed by the party appointing the attorney and also mention
     the identification of at least two witnesses and the conveyancer of the
     power of attorney.

152. Person may become attorney in more than one case: A person may
     be appointed as an attorney simultaneously in more than once case or
     by more than one person in the same case.

           Provided that a person who is an attorney of a party to a case
     shall not also become an attorney of the opposite party to the same
     case simultaneously.

153. Party may be attorney: In cases where the same party of a case
     involves two or more than two persons as plaintiffs or defendants,
     any one of them may be appointed as an attorney in the same case on
     behalf of others.

154. Attorney may be appointed in more than one court: A person who
     has been appointed as an attorney in a case sub judice in a court may
     be appointed as an attorney in another case sub judice in another court.


155. Powers of attorney: The powers of an attorney shall be as set forth
     in the power of attorney executed at the time of appointment of the
     attorney.




                                    590
156. Power of attorney to meet requirements: (1) Prior to registering a
     power of attorney, the court shall examine whether such power of
     attorney meets the requirements in accordance with this Chapter and
     register it if it appears to meet such requirements.

           (2)    If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (1), it
     appears that the power of attorney does not meet the requirements for
     registration, it shall be endorsed setting out the reason for its failure to
     meet such requirements and file it within a period of three days along
     with such requirements.

           (3)    If the power of attorney endorsed pursuant to sub-section
     (2) is executed in meeting of the requirements and produced within
     the time-limit, the court shall register such power of attorney.

157. Power to change attorney or carry out proceeding in person: (1) If
     a party to a case who has once appointed an attorney so wishes, the
     party may at any time revoke the power of attorney executed by
     him/her and carry out acts pertaining to the case in person or appoint
     another person as his/her attorney.

           (2)    In the event of the appointment of an attorney or carrying
     out of acts pertaining to the case by the party in person pursuant to
     sub-section (2), the power of attorney appointing the attorney shall be
     attached with the case-file, or record thereof shall be maintained if the
     party carries out such acts in person.

158. Provisions relating to authorized attorney: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a person may appoint
     another person as an authorized attorney by executing a power of



                                      591
attorney, to file a plaint, submit a statement of defense, withdraws
plaint claim or enter into compromise or carry out any other legal
action on his/her behalf, with or without specifying any case.

      (2)    If any summons or summons required to be given to or
served on the concerned party of a case in which an authorized
attorney has been appointed is given to or served on the authorized
attorney, the summons or summons shall be deemed to have been duly
given or served.

      (3)    A person who has been appointed as an authorized
attorney pursuant to sub-section (1) may, in the case of proceedings of
the case, appear in person before the court or appoint another person
as an attorney.

      (4)    In appointing an authorized attorney by executing a
general power of attorney without specifying any case pursuant to this
Section, it has to be signed and executed by the person appointing an
attorney in presence of, and certified by, any district judge if the
power of attorney is executed within the territory of Nepal, and any
Nepalese ambassador or consul general if it is executed in a foreign
country.

      (5)    In making certification of a power of attorney pursuant to
sub-section (4), the photograph of the person who appoints and that of
the person who is appointed under the power of attorney shall be
affixed unto any part of the power of attorney, and duplicate copies of
their citizenship certificates or passports shall also be attached
therewith.



                               592
           (6)    The fee of two hundred rupees shall be charged for the
     certification of a power of attorney pursuant to sub-section (4).

159. Transfer of right in immovable property through authorized
     attorney: (1) A person who, for any reason, is not able to appear in
     person before the concerned office in order to sell or dispose of, or
     exchange, or otherwise transfer any immovable property in which
     he/she has right and ownership or execute a will to be effectively
     immediately in relation to such property or to execute such a deed as
     required to be registered pursuant to law may sell, dispose of,
     exchange or transfer such property by appointing the authorized
     attorney by executing the power of attorney setting out the reasonable
     ground for his/her inability to appear in person.

           (2)    In appointing an authorized attorney pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the procedures referred to in sub-sections (4) and (5) of
     Section 158 shall be fulfilled.

           (3)    A person who has been appointed as an authorized
     attorney pursuant to sub-section (1) shall carry out such acts as
     required be performed on behalf of the person executing the power of
     attorney, subject to the terms and conditions of the power of attorney
     executed and delivered to him/her.

           (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, a deed of testament or testamentary will cannot be executed
     by appointing an authorized attorney.

160. Termination of status of authorized attorney: The status of
     authorized attorney pursuant to a power of authority executed



                                       593
pursuant to this Chapter shall ipso facto be terminated in any of the
following circumstances:

      (a)   If the power of authorized attorney specifies any certain
            act, purpose and period and such act, purpose or period is
            completed or expired,

      (b)   If the power of authorized attorney is so executed that it
            shall cease to remain valid after the occurrence of any
            specific event or circumstance or completion of such
            event or circumstance, and such event or circumstance
            occurs or completes,

      (c)   If the person executing the power of attorney revokes the
            power of attorney by publishing a notice in any two
            newspapers of national circulation,

      (d)   If the person executing the power of attorney or the
            person appointed under such power dies prior to the
            completion of the act set forth in the power of attorney,

      (e)   If the concerned person of the property intended to be
            transferred through attorney appears in person and
            transfer the right in such property,

      (f)   If a case is filed in the court a case between the person
            executing, and the person appointed under, the power of
            attorney, and the person appointed by the power of
            attorney or any of his/her undivided family members in
            relation to the property as referred to in the power of
            attorney,


                              594
(g)   If the person appointed under the power of attorney gives
      information in writing to the person executing the power
      of attorney, thereby expressing his/her unwillingness to
      act as the authorized attorney.




                        595
                                Chapter-14

        Provisions Relating to Interlocutory or Interim Orders

161. Petition to be made for issuance of interlocutory order: (1) Where
     the claim of a plaint or memorandum of appeal shall be meaningless if
     any act or action is not prevented immediately or if any act is not done
     immediately in the course of proceedings of any case, or if any matter
     is not maintained as it is in regard to any claim or demand of a case,
     the plaintiff or appellant may make a petition, setting out that matter,
     to the concerned court, praying for the issuance of an interlocutory
     order on any matter.

     Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     "interlocutory order" means any order other than a decision or
     judgment made in relation to a case.

           (2)    If, upon hearing the petition received pursuant to sub-
     section (1), it appears to be appropriate to issue such an order, the
     court may, for the reasons to be recorded, issue an interlocutory order
     on any matter.

162. Petition against interlocutory order: (1) A person who is not
     satisfied with the following order issued by a lower court in the course
     of proceedings of a case may make a petition to the court hearing
     appeal from such court to uphold or withhold such an order within
     fifteen days after the date of such order:

           (a)    Order to hold parties on recognizance, take guarantee and
                  court fees,


                                     596
           (b)    Revocation of a complaint made to the judge against the
                  order of endorsement that the case cannot be registered
                  pursuant to Chapter-10,

           (c)    Order issued upon determining the matters relating to
                  locus standi, limitation or jurisdiction in the course of
                  holding preliminary hearings pursuant to Chapter-11,

           (d)    Any other order made in the course of proceedings of the
                  case.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     any party to a case may make to the court hearing appeals, a petition
     alleging that the time-limit has expired of any action taken by the
     court or irregularity has been made by not performing the act required
     to be done in accordance with law within the specified period, and
     praying for the revocation such undue order.

           (3)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
     the court hearing appeal shall, as required, procure the report and
     case-file from the concerned court and hold hearings.

           (4)    If, in holding hearing pursuant to sub-section (3), if the
     order made by the lower court seems to be undue or made upon
     expiration of the time-limit, the court hearing appeal may, for reasons
     to be recorded, uphold or withhold such an order or order to act in
     accordance with law.

163. Provisions relating to the issuance of interim order: (1) A party
     may, in the course of proceedings or in relation to an injunction
     petition, pray for the issuance of an interim order, setting out that the


                                    597
claims of the petition would be meaningless if any matter is not kept
in status quo in respect of any matter or claim of the case on any
matter pending the final settlement of such a case.

       (2)   If an interim order is prayed for pursuant to sub-section
(1) and the court thinks it appropriate and necessary, the court may
issue the following order for a period until the petition is finally
settled:

       (a)   To issue an interim order with specification of the period,

       (b)   To make an order to summon the presence of the other
             party to hold discussions on whether the interim order
             issued pursuant to clause (a) should be given continuity
             or not,

       (c)   If it appears, from the discussions held in relation to the
             interim order, that there exists a situation where the other
             party has suffered loss, following the final decision of the
             petition, as a result of the issuance of the interim order in
             his/her favor and a commitment is writing is made to
             bear compensation pursuant to the laws in force, to issue
             a conditional interim order,

       (d)   If the claim of a petition appears to be meaningless if the
             matter of claim of the petition is not kept in status quo, to
             keep that matter in status quo.

       (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
a petition is made for an interim order but the court is of the opinion




                               598
     that it is appropriate to made decision on a given matter, nothing shall
     preclude the court from making the final decision on that matter.

           (4)    The interim order issued pursuant to sub-section (2) shall
     be deemed to have ipso facto been ineffective upon the final
     settlement of the petition.

           (5)    If an order is made to summon the presence of the other
     party to hold discussions on whether the interim order issued pursuant
     to sub-section (2) should be given continuity or not and discussion
     cannot be hold on that day because of the petitioner, the interim order
     shall then be inoperative.

           (6)    The court shall assign the reason for issuing, or refusing
     to issue, an interim order pursuant to this Section.

164. Revocation of interim order: (1) Any party may make a petition to
     the same court for the revocation of an interim order issued pursuant
     to Section 163 showing the reason that the interim order has been
     issued upon ex parte hearing or that an opportunity has not been given
     to that party to present his/her matters.

           (2)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
     may summon the presence of the other party and hold hearings on that
     matter.

           (3)    If, in holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     court thinks it appropriate to revoke the interim order issued pursuant
     to Section 163, the court may make an order to revoke such order.




                                     599
           (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), if
     it appears appropriate to amend or alter the terms of the interim order
     instead of revoking the same, the court may, for the reasons to be
     recorded, amend or alter the terms of the interim order issued pursuant
     to sub-section (2) of Section 163.

165. Compensation to be paid: (1) Where         the   interim   order   issued
     pursuant to Section 163 has been revoked or its terms altered or
     amended and any party has suffered any loss or damage being unable
     to do any act or take any action as a result of the interim order prior to
     such revocation, amendment or alteration, that party may make a
     petition to the concerned court against the party praying for the
     interim order for compensation, setting out the amount of such loss or
     damage.

           (2)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
     may summon the presence of the concerned parties in the court and
     hold hearings on the matter.

           (3)    If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (2), it
     appears that the petitioner has actually suffered loss or damage as a
     result of the issuance of interim order, the court may order for the
     payment of compensation in consideration for such loss or damage.

           Provided that no order may be made to make payment of
     compensation in consideration of any remote or indirect loss or
     damage.




                                     600
      (4)     If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the party
praying for the interim order shall pay the compensation pursuant to
that order.




                               601
                                Chapter-15

    Provisions Relating to Examination of Documentary Evidence

166. Production of documentary evidence: (1) The plaintiff or the
     defendant, as the case may be, shall produce the originals and
     duplicate copies of such documentary evidence related with the claims
     as set down by the plaintiff in the plaint and with the pleas as set
     down by the defendant in the statement of defense along with the
     plaint or the statement of defense, as the case may be.

           (2)    The court shall verify the original evidence submitted
     pursuant to sub-section (1) with its copy and return the original
     evidence to the concerned party.

           (3)    The original returned pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
     produced as and when the court so demands.

           (4)    Any evidence not produced pursuant to sub-sections (1)
     and (3) may not be taken in evidence in the concerned case.

           (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if
     in a case of which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff or defendant,
     the documentary evidence cannot for any reason be produced at the
     time of filing or submission of the plaint or the statement of defense,
     the plaintiff or the defendant may set down the reason and description
     thereof in the plaint or the statement of defense that in which office
     such evidence is or likely to be held.

           (6)   Where description is set down pursuant to sub-section (5),
     the court may, as required, itself procure and examine such evidence.


                                     602
               (7)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if it is not possible to produce the original of any
      documentary evidence before the court immediately, a duplicate copy
      thereof shall be duly produced with the plaint or the statement of
      defense, accompanied by the reason for the same.

167. Evidence to be mentioned: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
      in this Section 167, if the original or duplicate copy of any
      documentary evidence is not available for the time being but such
      evidence is in the custody of any person or organization, the plaintiff
      or the defendant shall mention that matter in the plaint or the
      statement of defense, as the case may be.

               (2)   If the evidence is mentioned pursuant to sub-section (1)
      and it is necessary to examine such evidence, the court may order the
      concerned person or organization to produce the original of such
      evidence before the court within such a period as specified by the
      court.

               (3)   If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), such
      person or organization shall produce such evidence within the period
      as specified by the court.

               (4)   The court may fine the person or chief of organization
      who does not produce the evidence pursuant to sub-section (3) with a
      sum not exceeding five hundred rupees.

168. Request for time: (1) If, for any reason, it is not possible to produce
      any documentary evidence at the time of filing of the plaint or
      submission of the statement of defense and the plaintiff or the



                                      603
     defendant makes a request, accompanied by the reason for the same,
     for time to produce such evidence, the court may, if it finds the reason
     to be reasonable, give the time not exceeding fifteen days.

           (2)      The plaintiff or the defendant shall produce such
     evidence before the court within the time given pursuant to sub-
     section (1).

           (3)      Any evidence not produced within the time as referred to
     in sub-section (2) may not be examined as evidence.

169. Request for leave to produce evidence: If any new and important
     documentary evidence that was not in the knowledge of the plaintiff
     or the defendant at the time of filing of the plaint or submission of the
     statement of defense, as the case may be, comes to the knowledge or
     is found/discovered and the plaintiff or the defendant requests for a
     leave to produce such an evidence and the matter seems to be
     reasonable, the court may grant a leave to produce such evidence and
     examine it.

170. Return of originals: (1) After the production of the original and
     duplicate copy of any documentary evidence pursuant to this Chapter,
     the person producing such evidence shall be caused to sign the
     duplicate copy of such documentary evidence.

           (2)      The concerned officer of the court shall verify the
     duplicate copy of the documentary evidence produced pursuant to
     sub-section (1) with its original and certify the duplicate copy and
     record it in the concerned case-file.




                                     604
            (3)   After recording the certified duplicate copy as referred to
     in sub-section (2) with the case-file, the original of the documentary
     evidence produced pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be returned to the
     concerned person.

171. Not to examine evidence prior to submission of statement of
     defense: No proceeding may be initiated to examine evidence
     normally prior to the submission of the statement of defense or
     expiration of the period for the submission of the statement of defense
     upon the filing of a plaint, except in accordance with law.

172. To examine evidence: If it appears necessary to examine any such
     document in evidence as maintained with a government office as
     mentioned in the plaint or the statement of defense, an order shall be
     made to examine it normally within a period of seven days after the
     date of the submission of the statement of defense or after the date
     upon the expiration of the period for the submission of the statement
     of defense where such statement has not been submitted.

173. To examine evidence on issue to be decided: (1) On the due date
     appointed for appearance of the parties of a case following the filing
     of the plaint, the court shall inspect the plaint and the statement of
     defense and all documents produced, in presence of the plaintiff and
     the defendant and inquire the plaintiff and the defendant into
     necessary matters and ascertain the issues admitted or denied by both
     parties.




                                    605
              (2)    If, in making ascertainment pursuant to sub-section (1), it
     appears that both parties agree on the issues claimed by the plaintiff,
     the court shall make decision on the same day.

              (3)    If, in making ascertainment pursuant to sub-section (1), it
     appears that both parties disagree on the matters partly or fully, the
     court shall frame the issues that are denied and to be decided and
     clearly set out other additional evidence required to be examined in
     that connection, order the production of evidence and proofs and
     appoint the date for the examination of evidence and proofs.

              (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, no evidence may be examined on any matter other than the
     matters relevant with the issues to be decided.

174. Power of court to produce deed: (1) The court may, at any time in
     the course of proceedings of a case, order any person who is in
     possession such a document which the party of the case has not been
     able to produce or cannot produce as may be necessary to decide the
     issues of the case, to produce the deed within the period as specified
     by the court.

              (2)    The court may order any person in possession of any
     document that can be taken in evidence and is relevant with the issues
     to be decided in a case to produce such a document before the court.

              (3)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the
     concerned person shall produce the deed in person or through any
     other person before the court within the period as specified in the
     order.



                                       606
            (4)     The court may fine the person who does not produce the
     document pursuant to sub-section (3) or does not appear before the
     court without showing a reasonable reason for the failure to produce it
     or does not make a petition with a sum not exceeding five thousand
     rupees.

175. Order of examination of evidence: (1) Except as otherwise ordered
     by the court, in examining evidence on the date appointed pursuant to
     the court order for the examination of evidence by the court, the
     evidence produced by the defendant shall ordinarily be examined after
     the examination of the evidence produced by the plaintiff.

            (2)     If, in examining evidence pursuant to sub-section (1), any
     party immediately raise any objection that any document or proof is
     inadmissible in evidence or is irrelevant, the judge shall immediately
     order as to whether such an objection is reasonable or not.

            (3)     If, in making order pursuant to sub-section (2), any
     document produced by any party is held to be inadmissible in
     evidence or irrelevant, that matter shall be recorded in the case-file.

176. Power to cause document to be executed: (1) The court may, in
     relation to any necessary matter related with the case as required to be
     inquired with the parties of case, inquire it at any time in presence of
     the plaintiff or the defendant and cause a document to be executed to
     that effect.

            (2)     Except on such matters as required to be tried, heard and
     settled upon a plaint in accordance with law, the court shall try, hear
     and settle any case to be tired, heard and settled upon any other



                                     607
     complaint by setting out the evidence of each matter required to be set
     out by the plaintiff or the defendant, getting them to make depositions
     and recording the same.

177. To make deposition whether document is genuine or forged: (1)
     On the date appointed for the examination of proof and evidence, the
     evidentiary document submitted by the plaintiff shall be shown in
     original to the defendant and that of evidentiary document submitted
     by the defendant shall be shown in original to the plaintiff, and the
     contents to be read out to each, and if any party names a document as
     a genuine, forged or fraudulent one, deposition to that effect shall be
     taken and recorded.

           (2)   If, in showing or reading out a document pursuant to sub-
     section (1), a party is not able to immediately determine whether the
     document in question is genuine, forged or fraudulent one and
     requests for a time-limit, the court may give a time-limit not
     exceeding three days.

           (3)   Where a document bearing the signature of any person
     other than the parties to the case has been produced and a request is
     made by a party of the case for a time-limit in view of being unable to
     immediately determine whether the document is genuine, forged or
     fraudulent, a time-limit not exceeding fifteen days may be given to
     make statement, accompanied by evidence, as to the genuineness,
     forgery or fraudulence of the document.

           (4)   The person who is to make deposition within the time-
     limit given pursuant to sub-section (3) shall be caused to make



                                   608
       deposition as to the genuineness, forgery or fraudulence of the
       document, and any deposition made by him/her shall be recorded.

             (5)    Where a deposition to be taken pursuant to sub-section
       (4) is made that the document is forged or fraudulent, depositions of
       all parties to the case, if present on that day, shall be taken on that day
       and that by any party who is not present on that day shall be recorded
       on the day on which he/she is present.

             (6)    Where the attorney or legal practitioner of any party is
       making presence and it appears necessary to summon the presence of
       the concerned party in person, the court may summon the presence of,
       and take the deposition of, such a party in person.

             (7)    If, in showing or reading out an evidentiary document
       pursuant to this Section, the genuineness, forgery or fraudulence of
       the document cannot be ascertained, the court may send such an
       evidentiary document to the concerned specialist for its examination.

178. Reading out for genuineness, forgery or fraudulence not required:
       (1)   Any document that cannot be taken in evidence in accordance
       with law is not required to be read out or shown for the purpose of
       genuineness, forgery or fraudulence.

             (2)    If a document produced by a defendant affects another
       defendant, it shall be shown and read out to such affected defendant
       and his/her deposition shall be taken, in accordance with the
       procedures set forth in Section 177.

179.   Examination of evidence by court hearing appeal: If it is
       necessary to adjudge a case of which the judgment examining court is


                                       609
     seized by way of appeal or otherwise by ascertaining whether any
     document produced for evidence in that case is a genuine or forged
     one and the lower court has adjudged the case without carrying out
     that proceeding, the court hearing appeal shall procure the original of
     that deed or document and take the deposition of the party.

180. To try, hear and adjudicate case by taking deposition in the same
     case: A case that is a criminal case in accordance with law and has
     arisen from the statement of defense or deposition of the defendant of
     any civil case pending in any court shall be tried by taking deposition
     for the same case-file.

           Provided that the court trying only specific type of cases under
     any specific Act shall try, hear and settle only such cases in
     accordance with such Act.

181. To examine affected parties: If it appears from the study of the
     documents attached with the case-file related with any case that any
     matter to be adjudged in such a case will also affect any third person
     or that such person is also found to be relevant with the case, the court
     shall examine even such a person, provide him/her with a reasonable
     time and opportunity to be heard and try, hear and settle the case by
     holding him/her on recognizance based on the evidence produced by
     him/her and by requiring him/her to appear on the appointed due date
     as if he/she were the principal person.

182. Power to make measurement or map: (1) If it appears that the issue
     should not be adjudged without making a map, survey or
     measurement of any immovable property subject to dispute in a case,



                                    610
the court may order for making the map or measurement of such
property.

       (2)   In making a map or measurement pursuant to an order
made under sub-section (1), a date shall be appointed for both parties
to make presence at the place where the map or measurement has to
be made or a notice of such date shall be given to them.

       (3)   Where a date has been appointed pursuant to sub-section
(2), one employee of at least non-gazetted second class serving in the
court, also accompanied by a surveyor, shall go to that place and carry
out such inspection, measurement and survey of the house, wall or
other immovable property as may be required to be so surveyed or
measured on that date, in presence also of both parties of the case, at
least one representative of the local body as far as available and at
least two local persons.

       (4)   In making a map or measurement pursuant to sub-section
(3), such a map deed has to be got signed by the concerned party,
local person and representative of the local body and by the concerned
employee, produced before the court and recorded in the concerned
case-file.

       (5)   If the parties do not show up in the place where such map
or measurement has to be carried out pursuant to sub-section (3) or
refuse to sign despite showing up there or if this is a case in which the
parties have not made presence on the date appointed for appearance,
such a map or measurement as may be required shall be carried out in
presence of the other persons mentioned in sub-section (4), and a



                               611
      remark that the parties have been absent shall be mentioned therein,
      and shall be signed by the employee deputed and by at least one
      representative of the local body, produced before the court and
      recorded in the concerned case-file.

            (6)     If a representative of the local body who is required to be
      present pursuant to this Section is not present despite a notice having
      been given to him/her, any inspection, map or measurement meeting
      the other requirements shall not be invalid only by the reason that
      he/she has remained absent.

            (7)     A map or measurement that fails to meet the
      requirements pursuant to this Section shall be inadmissible in
      evidence.

183. Power to inspect venue: (1) If it appears that it is not possible to
      produce the subject-matter of a case actually before the court owing to
      the complexity of the subject-matter of the case or it is necessary to
      make direct observation or inspection of the place where the matter of
      dispute or immovable property is situated, the judge shall make an
      order, setting out the reason for the same.

            (2)     If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
      shall appoint the day in advance for such inspection, and the judgment
      himself or herself or the technician or other employee deputed
      pursuant to the order of court shall make such observation or
      inspection.

            (3)     If observation or inspection is made by a technician or
      other person deputed pursuant to sub-section (2), such technician or



                                      612
person shall prepare a report only on the matters relevant to the
subject-matter of the case and submit it to the court.




                                613
                                 Chapter-16

             Provisions Relating to Examination of Witness

184. Parties to cause presence of witness: (1)      The party of a case shall
      cause the presence of any witness mentioned as his/her evidence on
      the date appointed by the court for the examination of witness.

            (2)    The evidence of a witness who fails to make presence on
      the date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not be taken in.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
      (2), if the witness fails to make presence on the due date appointed for
      causing the presence of witness owing to a circumstance as referred to
      in clause (c) of Section 144 and the party makes a petition for the
      appointment of another due date, and the petition is accompanied by a
      recommendation by the concerned local body or any government
      body certifying the occurrence of such a circumstance, the court shall
      appoint another due date to examine such a witness no later than ten
      days of the date of such petition.

185. Power to court to subpoena and examine witness: (1)
      Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 184, the court shall
      issue a summons to any witness who must be examined in a case
      involving the property of the Government of Nepal or public property
      or public right, interest or concern, thereby ordering such a witness to
      make presence before the court within fifteen days.




                                      614
             (2)   Where a summons is issued pursuant to sub-section (1),
    such a witness shall make presence within the period specified by the
    court.

             (3)   A summons to be issued in the name of a witness
    pursuant to this Section shall be in the format set forth in Schedule-13.

186. Power to examine witness through video conference: (1)
    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if it is
    not possible to produce before the court a witness required to be
    examined pursuant to this Chapter because of the witness being highly
    aged or physically infirm or staying outside Nepal, and any party of
    the case makes a petition to the court for the examination of such a
    witness through video conference and the court thinks the matter to be
    reasonable, the court may make an order for the examination of the
    witness through video conference.

             (2)   If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
    concerned party shall cause the presence of the witness at the pace and
    day appointed for the examination of witness through video
    conference.

             (3)   In making examination of the witness pursuant to sub-
    section (2), the examination of witness shall be made or caused to be
    made as if the witness present at the video conference were present
    before the court.

             (4)   In making examination of the witness pursuant to sub-
    section (3), the court shall write down and record the deposition of the
    witness on video conference and the matters of the video conference.



                                   615
           (5)    The record of examination of a witness through video
     conference shall be maintained in the format set forth in Schedule-14.

           (6)    The expenses incurred in the examination of a witness
     pursuant to this Section shall be borne by the party applying for the
     examination of the witness through video conference.

187. Power to depute employee to examine witness: (1) If any party of
     the case makes a petition to the court to go to the place where a
     witness who is unable to appear before the court due to physical
     infirmity is residing or staying and examine such a witness and the
     petition seems to be reasonable, the court may order for the
     examination of such a witness.

           (2)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the judge
     himself or herself may proceed to or depute an office of the concerned
     court to the place where such a witness is residing or staying, and the
     witness shall be examined, or caused to be examined, by the judge or
     employee, as the case may be.

           (3)    If an employee is deputed pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     concerned employee shall proceed to the place where such a witness
     is residing or staying and examine him/her.

           (4)    The expenses incurred in proceeding of the judge or
     deputation by the court of an employee to examine the witness shall
     be borne by the person making petition for the examination of the
     witness pursuant to sub-section (2).

188. Witness to be examined on due date appointed for parties: (1)
     Except in cases referred to in Section 186 or 187, the court shall so


                                      616
     appoint the day for the examination of witnesses that such
     examination is made on the due date appointed for the parties to make
     presence.

            (2)   In examining a witness, there shall be prepared a
     deposition containing the matters expressed by the witness, and the
     deposition shall be signed by him/her and recorded.

189. To take an oath: Prior to making a deposition by a witness who
     appears before the court to make such deposition shall take oath
     before the judge that he/she will state noting but the truth, in the form
     specified in Schedule-15.

190. Deposition taken by judge: (1) The deposition of a witness shall be
     taken down by the judge before the bench of whom the examination
     of witness is referred to.

            (2)   In examining the witness pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     judge may seek the assistance of required employees to record the
     deposition and examine the witness.

191. Witness to be examined on due date appointed: (1) Except in cases
     referred to in Section 186 or 187, the deposition of all witnesses in
     appearance at the court on the due date appointed for the examination
     of witness shall be taken down.

            (2)    Where, in making examination pursuant to sub-section
     (1), it is not possible because of the time factor to complete the taking
     down of the deposition of all witnesses in appearance on that day, the
     due date for appearance shall, for reasons to be recorded, be so




                                    617
     appointed for the witnesses and parties that the deposition of
     witnesses shall be taken down on the next day thereof.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
     "on the next day thereof" means the first day on which the court
     remains open, immediately following the day of the examination of
     witness.

192. Deposition to be certified: (1) The judge shall, in examining a
     witness, put questions to the witness on the matters as required to be
     set out by the witness and record in the deposition such questions and
     replies made by the witness to such questions and also the description
     of cross examination, if any, made in accordance with law.

           (2)    After the recording of the description as referred to in
     sub-section (1), the court shall ask the witness whether he/she has any
     thing else to state on any matter and cause him/her to state such matter,
     if any, and set down in the prepared deposition that the examination of
     witness has been made in presence of him/her and attending parties of
     the case or attorneys and cause it to be signed by him/her.

           (3)    If the witness, parties of the case or attorneys refuse to
     sign the deposition pursuant to sub-section (2), the witness examining
     judge shall certify that matter as mentioned by any or all of the
     witness, parties of the case or attorneys and record in the case-file of
     the concerned case.

           (4)    While examining a witness, the deposition of a witness
     shall be taken in the form set forth in Schedule-16.




                                    618
193. Remarks to be made and certified: If, in examining a witness
     pursuant to this Chapter, the concerned witness does not give or
     refuses to give answers to the questions asked by the judge or gives
     answers to unrelated matters rather than answers sought by the
     questions put to him/her, the judge shall make remarks thereof and
     certify the same pursuant to Section 192.

194. Power to examine witness on commission/letter rogetory: (1)
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a
     witness required to be examined is a resident of another district and
     because of his/her physical infirmity he/she is not able to appear in
     person and it is not possible to procure his/her presence in the court
     trying the case and take his/her deposition, and the concerned party
     makes a petition, setting out such matter, to the court for the
     examination of such a witness on commission/letter rogetory and the
     contents of the petition seem to be reasonable, the court may order to
     examine the witness on commission/letter rogetory.

           (2)    The    interrogatories    required      to   be   asked   on
     commission/letter rogetory pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be framed
     in the form set forth in Schedule-17 and certified by the judge and the
     commission/letter rogetory shall be sent to the district court of the
     district where the witness is staying or residing.

           (3)    Where a commission/letter rogetory is issued by the
     concerned court pursuant to sub-section (2), the court shall appoint the
     due date for the concerned parties to the case to make presence before




                                     619
the court examining the witness on commission/letter rogetory and
give information thereof to the concerned court.

      (4)    Upon receipt of the commission/letter rogetory pursuant
to sub-section (2), the concerned district court shall prepare a
deposition containing the answer to each interrogatory of the
commission/letter rogetory upon fulfilling the procedures pursuant to
this Chapter as if the case were filed in that court, and the judge of the
concerned district court shall certify the deposition pursuant to
Section 192 or 193 and send it to the concerned court that has issued
the commission/letter rogetory.

      (5)    In fulfilling the procedures of the commission/letter
rogetory pursuant to sub-section (4), the concerned district court shall
give information thereof to the parties of the case or attorneys and
appoint the due date for them to make presence and send them to the
case in which the case has been filed.




                                620
                                 Chapter-17

            Provisions Relating to Hearings and Judgment

195. Power to make judgment on matter as agreed: (1) On the due date
     appointed for the plaintiff and the defendant to make presence after
     the submission of the statement of defense, the plaint, the statement of
     defense and all documents produced shall be examined in presence of
     both parties and shown to them, and the plaintiff and the defendant
     shall also be inquired into the matters tat are not clear, and the court
     shall consider whether both parties agree or disagree thereon.

           (2)      If, in making consideration pursuant to sub-section (1), it
     appears that the defendant has admitted and agreed to the claims of
     the plaintiff, the court may adjudge the case at any time.

196. Power to hold pre-hearing discussions of plaintiff and defendant:
     (1) If the court considers it reasonable to hold pre-hearing discussions
     of the plaintiff and the defendant in order to ascertain the matter to be
     adjudged in the case pursuant to this Chapter, the court may, for
     reasons to be recorded, order to hold such discussions.

           (2)      Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     court shall appoint the due date for that purpose and hold such
     discussions.

           (3)      The plaintiff, defendant or their attorneys and legal
     practitioners may attend the meeting referred to in sub-section (2).

           (4)      On the discussions referred to in sub-section (3), the
     plaintiff and the defendant may present claim, counter-claim or


                                      621
     statement of defense and evidence in support or rebuttal of that matter
     and their claims or pleas in order to ascertain the matter to be
     adjudged in the case.

             (5)   The court shall ascertain the matter to be adjudged in a
     court from the discussions referred to in sub-section (4) and makes an
     order to examine evidence if it appears that necessary evidence has to
     be examined in that matter.

             (6)   Where discussions are held pursuant to this Section, the
     court shall maintain records thereof and attach the same with the case-
     file.

197. To hold hearings upon completion of examination of evidence: (1)
     The judge shall, upon the completion of the examination of evidence,
     hold the hearing and decide the case ordinarily within one month.

             (2)   In holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     parties of the case may present their respective claims or defense and
     pleadings on their own or through legal practitioners or attorneys
     appointed by them respectively.

             (3)   If, in holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     court makes an order to present pleading notes in order to clarify the
     additional matters in the case, the parties of the case shall present
     pleading notes in writing on their own or through legal practitioners or
     attorneys appointed by them respectively.

198. To provide opportunity to enter into compromise: (1) If the parties
     of a case that is sub judice in the court wish to enter into compromise




                                    622
at any stage, they may make a joint petition, setting out that matter, to
the court.

      (2)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the judge
shall read out the contents of the petition and the meanings and
consequences thereof known to the concerned parties.

      (3)    If, upon reading out pursuant to sub-section (2), both
parties agree to enter into compromise, the court shall draw up a deed
of compromise in triplicate.

      (4)    If, in reading out the contents of the deed of compromise
drawn up pursuant to sub-section (3) to the parties, the parties agree to
enter into compromise, it shall be caused to be signed by both parties,
and the judge shall make an order to certify that the deed of
compromise was executed in his/her presence, and one copy thereof
shall be attached with the concerned case-file and one copy each shall
be given to the plaintiff and the defendant.

      (5)    Where a deed of compromise is executed pursuant to
sub-section (3), no plaint that the party in question is not satisfied with
the deed of compromise shall be entertained except a plaint that the
other party has not complied with the deed of compromise.

      (6)    If transmission, registration or plotting of immovable
property has to be made pursuant to the deed of compromise, as a
result of the order made to enter into compromise pursuant to sub-
section (5), the court executing the deed of compromise shall, within
three days, ask the concerned office to carry out the act as referred to
in the deed of compromise.



                                623
199. Settlement of dispute through mediation: (1) If the parties of a case
      that is sub judice in the court wish to settle the case through mediation,
      they may, irrespective of the stage of the case, make a joint petition to
      the court for the settlement of dispute through mediation.

            (2)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and it
      appears to be reasonable to settle the dispute through mediation, the
      judge trying the case shall make an order to settle the dispute through
      mediation.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in pursuant to sub-
      section (1) or (2), if the court is of the opinion that it is appropriate to
      settle any case that is sub judice in the court through mediation, the
      court may, in consultation with the parties, order for the settlement of
      the dispute through mediation by the mediator appointed by the court
      itself or by the parties themselves.

            (4)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3), the
      dispute has to be settled through mediation in accordance with law.

            (5)    If the dispute is settled through mediation pursuant to
      sub-section (4), the parties shall make a petition to the court,
      accompanied thereby by a deed of settlement of dispute through
      mediation.

            (6)    If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (5), the
      court shall execute the deed of compromise between the parties.

            (7)    The provisions relating to compromise as set forth in sub-
      sections (3), (4) and (5) of Section 198 shall also apply mutatis
      mutandis to the settlement of dispute pursuant to this Section.


                                       624
            (8)   If an order is made for the settlement of a dispute through
     mediation pursuant to this Section but the dispute cannot be settled
     through mediation, the court shall appoint the due date for the parties
     to make presence and try, hear and settle such case in accordance with
     law.

200. Not to execute compromise or mediation: Notwithstanding anything
     contained in Section 198 or 199, a case instituted upon the
     Government of Nepal being plaintiff and a case relating to a public,
     government or community property shall not be capable of being
     settled by compromise or mediation.

            Provided that nothing shall bar the entering into compromise in
     such a manner as to maintain the public, government or community
     property.

201. Withdrawal of claim: (1) In any case other than a case in which the
     Government of Nepal is plaintiff, the party of the case may, in order
     to abandon the claims made by him/her in the plaint, memorandum of
     appeal or petition and withdraw such claims or to withdraw the plaint,
     memorandum of appeal or petition stating that he/she is not able to
     prove the claims, make a petition to the court at any time prior to the
     hearing of the case.

            (2)   If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
     shall make an order to grant leave to withdraw the claims or the plaint,
     memorandum of appeal or petition as requested by the petition.

            (3)   If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), the court
     shall cross of the record of that case.



                                     625
           (4)      If the claims or the plaint, memorandum of appeal or
     petition are withdrawn pursuant to sub-section (1), the same party
     may not make a complaint against the persons made as opposite
     parties in the same plaint, memorandum of appeal or petition on the
     same matter.

202. Judgment to be made: (1) Subsequent to the completion of the
     hearings pursuant to this Chapter, the judge shall make verdict on the
     issue to be decided ordinarily on the same day of the completion of
     hearings and record the same in the verdict book.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "verdict
     book" means a book maintained in the court for the judge to record
     precisely the matters decided on a case and the grounds for the same.

           (2)      Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     where an order is issued to submit a note of pleadings pursuant to sub-
     section (3) of Section 197, verdict shall be made within seven days of
     the receipt of the note of pleadings.

           (3)      If the court, for reasons to be recorded, makes an order
     that verdict cannot be made on any matters to be decided on a case
     pursuant to sub-section (1) on the same day given that the matters
     involve complex legal or factual questions, the due date for
     appearance shall be appointed to read out the verdict within fifteen
     days in maximum.

           (4)      Where the due date is appointed pursuant to sub-section
     (3), the court shall make verdict on the case on that day, record it in
     the verdict book and read out the same to the parties.



                                     626
203. Matters to be stated in judgment: (1) The judge shall set down the
     judgment of a case based on the maters decided pursuant to Section
     202 ordinarily within seven days.

           (2)    The judgments set down pursuant to sub-section (1) state,
     inter alia, the following matters:

           (a)    The short description of the case,

           (b)    The plaintiff's claims,

           (c)    The defendant's contentions and defenses,

           (d)    The evidence produced by the plaintiff and the defendant,

           (e)    Maters adjudged upon agreement or disagreement
                  between the parties over the issues,

           (f)    Points of pleadings made by the party or his/her law
                  practitioner on the matters referred to in clause (d) or (e)
                  or the main points of note of pleadings, if any, submitted,

           (g)    Matters adjudged by the court and grounds for the
                  adjudging,

           (h)    Relevant law relied on for adjudging the issue,

           (i)    Such points of the judgment as required to be executed,

           (j)    Matter whether the judgment is appealable or not.

           (3)    A judgment shall be set down in the format set forth in
     Schedule-18.

           (4)    The judge shall sign and authenticate the judgment as
     referred to in sub-section (3).



                                       627
204. Prohibition on amendment to judgment: After the authentication of
     a judgment by the judgment as referred to in Section 203, no
     amendment shall be made to it, except correction of minor errors in
     such a manner as not to alter the verdict.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "minor
     errors" means such difference between a figure and word contained in
     the judgment, error on the reference of any one of the names,
     surnames and addresses of the plaintiff, defendant or witness and
     minor typo or printing error as not to differ or alter the matters
     adjudged and the verdict.

205. Deed to be executed on hearing of judgment: (1) Where a case is
     heard and adjudged by the court, the judgment shall be read out to the
     parties of the case, if they are present, and a deed shall be caused to be
     executed by them to the effect that they have heard the judgment and
     be attached with the case-file.

           (2)    If a party is not present as mentioned in sub-section (1)
     but his/her attorney is present, then such a deed shall be caused to be
     executed by the attorney.

           (3)    In the case of a party who is not present at the time of
     reading out the judgment pursuant to sub-section (1), the court passing
     the judgment shall, on its own or through the lower court, serve the
     time-limit for appeal, along with the notice of judgment, in the form
     set forth in Schedule-19, on that party within three days of the
     preparation of the judgment.




                                       628
                                Chapter-18

       Provisions Relating to Suspension and Transfer of Cases

206. Power to suspend cases: (1)       Where any party to any case, out of
     several cases filed in several courts, makes a petition to the court,
     showing a reason that the disposal of one case cannot be, or ought not
     to be, made until any other case is disposed of, or that judgment of
     one case will have substantial effect on the judgment of any other case
     or where the court deems that matter, on its own initiative, in the
     course of proceeding, the court may order, on reasons to be recorded,
     that such a case be suspended.

           (2)    If an order is made to suspend any case pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the court shall give information of that matter to the
     parties of the case, and also give information thereof to the concerned
     court in which another related case is filed.

           (3)    Upon receipt of the information referred to in sub-section
     (2), the concerned court shall, upon disposal of the related case filed
     in it, give information thereof, accompanied by a copy of the
     judgment, to the court suspending the case pursuant to sub-section (2)
     within thirty days after the date of judgment.

           (4)    If, upon the disposal of the case pursuant to sub-section
     (3), the parties to the case are on recognizance and the due date has to
     be appointed for the parties to appear on the court suspending the case,
     the court shall appoint such date for the parties to make appearance
     before the court suspending the case and send them to that court.



                                      629
              (5)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, if
     different courts hold divergent views on which of the cases sub judice
     in such courts should be suspended, the courts shall make reports to
     the court hearing appeals from the concerned courts.

              (6)   Where a report has been sent pursuant to sub-section (5),
     the appellate court shall make an appropriate order on that matter and
     the concerned court shall act in accordance with that order.

207. Revival of suspended case: (1) If a case suspended pursuant to
     Section 206 has to be revived and proceeded, any party of the case
     may make a petition, accompanied by the reason for the revival, to the
     court.

              (2)   If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and the
     grounds appear to be reasonable, the court may revive and hear the
     case suspended as prayed for by the petition.

              (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if information is received that the case suspended in another
     court has been adjudged or there is no reason to continue the
     suspension of the case, the court shall revive and proceed the
     suspended case.

              (4)   In suspending the case, the parties on recognizance shall
     be dispensed with the requirement to make presence on the appointed
     due date. In reviving the suspended case, the parties on recognizance
     shall be summoned by giving them a time-limit of seven days, and the
     case shall be proceeded.




                                     630
208. Powers to transfer cases: (1) If a court makes a report to the
     Supreme Court, setting out the reason for any obstruction to or
     hindrance with the settlement by the court of any case filed in it and
     yet to be settled and the reason seems to be reasonable, the Supreme
     Court may order another court of equal jurisdiction to proceed, hear,
     try and adjudicate such a case.

              (2)   Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), such
     a court shall proceed, hear, try and adjudicate the case pursuant to that
     order.

              Provided that an appeal against the judgment made by such a
     court shall lie with the court hearing appeals from the court in which
     the plaint was originally filed.

209. Power of Supreme Court to hear and adjudicate case:
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, if, on the
     petition of any party of a case or the report of the concerned court in
     which the case is filed, the Supreme Court is of the opinion that, in
     view of the fact that the case involves some complex constitutional
     question or legal question of public importance or concern or related
     to interpretation it will be appropriate to have the case heard and
     adjudicated or any constitutional or legal question involved in the case
     decided by the Supreme Court, then the Supreme Court shall, for the
     reasons to be recorded, make an order to call for such a case and hear
     and adjudicate it by itself.

              (2)   Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     file of such a case shall be forwarded to the Supreme Court and



                                        631
information thereof shall be given to the parties of the case and date to
appear shall be appointed.

      (3)    Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
Supreme Court may hear and settle such a case or decide any
constitutional or legal question involved in that case, and remand the
case-file to the concerned court for the disposal of the rest matters.




                                632
                                Chapter-19

                       Provisions Relating to Appeal

210. Appeal to lie: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, a
     party who is not satisfied with a judgment made by the court of first
     instance may make appeal to the concerned appellate court within
     thirty days from the date of knowledge of the judgment.

            (2)     The time-limit for appeal shall begin within thirty days
     after the date of the deed executed to the effect of hearing the
     judgment where a party of an appealable case or his/her attorney,
     being present in the court, has heard the judgment, or after the date of
     the service of the notice of judgment, if any, where the party has not
     so appeared.

            (3)      Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
     even though a deed is not executed to the effect of hearing the
     judgment or the notice of judgment made is not served, the party of
     the case shall make an appeal within thirty days after the date of
     receipt of the duplicate copy of the judgment of the court within one
     year of the judgment of the case.

211. Circumstances where appeal cannot lie: Notwithstanding anything
     contained in section 210, no appeal shall lie in any of the following
     circumstances;

            (a)     Where the     time-limit   has   been   expired   without
                    submitting the statements of defense or without making




                                     633
                  defense after the receipt of the summons or after the
                  service of the summons,

           (b)    Where the case has been compromised or mediated,

           (c)    Where the plaint has been withdrawn,

           (d)    Where the plaint has been dismissed.

           Provided that an appeal may be made in the case of the plaint
     being dismissed unduly.

212. Requirement to pay court fees in making appeal: An evidence of
     payment of the court fees leviable in making an appeal pursuant to
     law shall be submitted with the memorandum of appeal.

           Provided that where an appeal is tendered for registration with
     the leave of court subject to the payment of the court fees at the time
     of the judgment of the case, the appeal shall be registered despite that
     an evidence of the payment of the court fees is not produced.

213. Matters to be stated in memorandum of appeal: (1) While making
     a memorandum of appeal, it shall be made, accompanied by a
     certified duplicate copy of the judgment, to the court hearing appeals
     from the court that has made the judgment, stating, inter alia, the
     following matters:

           (a)    A short description of the case,

           (b)    The court and judge making the judgment,

           (c)    Details of the time-limit for making appeal,

           (d)    Grounds on which the judgment is based,



                                    634
           (e)    Appeal pleas and grounds thereof,

           (f)    Legal basis for making appeal,

           (g)    Legal basis in support of the appeal pleas,

           (h)    Appeal fees.

           (2)    In making an appeal, the memorandum of appeal shall be
     written in descent language, and be accompanied by necessary
     documents proving the pleas of appeal.

           (3)    The memorandum of appeal shall be in the form set forth
     in Schedule-20.

           (4)    There shall be charged the appeal fees of two hundred
     rupees while making an appeal.

214. Appeal required to be made to court hearing appeal:              (1) In
     making an appeal, the memorandum of appeal as referred to in
     Section 213 shall be prepared and registered.

           (2)    Where a memorandum of appeal is tendered for
     registration pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall examine
     whether the matters referred to in Section 213 are stated in the
     memorandum of appeal or not, whether it is made within the time-
     limit as referred to in sub-section (2) or (3) of Section 210 or not,
     whether it is in the specified form or not, whether the fee as specified
     by the court is paid or not and whether the court fees are to be paid or
     not, and register it if it meets the requirements and give a receipt in
     the form set forth in Schedule-3 to the concerned party.




                                    635
           (3)    If, in examining a memorandum of appeal pursuant to
     sub-section (2), it does not seem to meet the requirements for any
     reason, the concerned court shall, for the reasons to be recorded, not
     register the memorandum of appeal and shall make endorsement on it.

215. Memorandum of appeal may be filed in court adjudging case: (1)
     Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 214, a memorandum
     of appeal may also be registered through the court adjudging the case.

           (2)    Where a memorandum of appeal is tendered for
     filing/registration pursuant to sub-section (1), such a court shall file
     the memorandum of appeal in fulfillment of the procedures as referred
     to in Section 214.

           (3)    The memorandum of appeal tendered for registration
     pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be sent, accompanied by the
     concerned case-file, to the court hearing appeal within three days.

           (4)    If the appellant who has filed a memorandum of appeal
     pursuant to this Section wishes to be on recognizance, the due date
     shall be appointed for appearance in the concerned court hearing
     appeal.

216. Appeal by government employee to concerned court: (1)            If any
     government employee is to make an appeal on a case involving
     his/her right, interest and concern and is not able to appear in person
     in the court hearing appeal owing to a government business, he/she
     may file the appeal, setting out the reasons, through such type of court
     hearing appeal, if any, available in the area where he/she is in service




                                    636
      or failing such a court, through the district court in the area where
      he/she is in service.

            (2)    If an appeal is tendered for filing pursuant to sub-section
      (1), such a court shall file the appeal in fulfillment of the procedures
      as referred to in Section 214.

            (3)    If an appeal is filed pursuant to sub-section (2), the court
      filing the memorandum of appeal shall send such a memorandum of
      appeal, along with certification of the filing of the memorandum of
      appeal and the concerned employee making appeal is in service in that
      area, to the concerned court hearing appeal within three days.

            (4)    If a government employee making appeal pursuant to this
      Section wishes to remain on recognizance, the court filing the
      memorandum of appeal shall hold him/her on recognizance and send
      information thereof to the concerned court hearing appeal.

217. Calling for case-file: (1) Upon the registration of an appeal in the
      court hearing appeal pursuant to this Chapter, the court shall call for
      the case-file of the concerned case within three days.

            (2)    If the case-file is called for pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the concerned court shall send the case-file to the court hearing appeal
      within three days of the receipt of letter.

218. To make order to respondent to make presence: (1)           After receipt
      of the case-file from the lower court pursuant to Section 217, the court
      hearing appeal shall, within fifteen days, hold hearings as to whether
      the case has to be tried by summoning the presence of the respondent
      as prayed by the appellant or not.


                                       637
           (2)    If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), it
     does not seem that the verdict made by the lower court will be
     reversed, the court hearing appeal shall adjudge as so held.

           (3)    If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1) and
     in consideration of the case upon appeal, it seems that the verdict
     made by the lower court may be reversed, the court hearing appeal
     shall, for the reasons to be recorded, order to summon the presence of
     the respondent for hearings.

219. Service of summons on respondent: (1)         Where an order is made
     pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 218, the summons as referred to
     in that order shall be served, in the form set forth in Schedule-21.

           (2)    The summons as referred to in sub-section (1) may be
     served by the court hearing appeal itself or through the court making
     judgment in the case originally in fulfillment of the procedures as
     referred to in Chapter-8.

           (3)    If the summons is served pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     respondent may, if he/she so wishes, submit defenses in writing to the
     court hearing appeal.

           (4)    If the respondent so wishes, the case shall be tried, heard
     and settled by holding him/her on recognizance.

220. Hearing of appeal: (1) After the service of the summons pursuant
     to sub-section (1) of Section 219, the court hearing appeal shall
     appoint the day for hearing where the respondent is present and both
     the appellant and the respondent are on recognizance and hear the
     appeal on that day, and even though both parties or either party are/is


                                     638
     not on recognizance, the court hearing appeal shall appoint the due
     date or day for hearing the appeal and hear the appeal on that date or
     day.

            (2)    After the service of the summons pursuant to sub-section
     (1) of Section 219, the court hearing appeal shall hear the appeal
     despite that the respondent is not present.

            (3)   Upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
     verdict shall be made as so be held.

            (4)   While delivering an appellate judgment, it shall be made
     in the format as referred to in Schedule-22.

221. Powers of the court hearing appeal: Upon hearing a case n the
     appellate level pursuant to Section 220, the court hearing appeal shall
     make any of the following decisions:

            (a)   To uphold or withhold the judgment of the lower court;

            (b)   To reverse partially or fully the judgment delivered by
                  the lower court;

            (c)   Where the judgment has been made by the lower court
                  without examining such evidence as required to have
                  been examined, to make such examination by itself or to
                  order the lower court to make such examination,

            (d)   If any particular matter required to have been adjudged
                  (fact in issue) in the case has not been adjudged, to make
                  such adjudgment itself or order the lower court to
                  adjudge such matter;



                                     639
             (e)    To make any consequential or incidental amendment to
                    the judgment of the lower court.

222. To exercise of powers of court of first instance: In trying, hearing
      or adjudging a case on appeal pursuant to this Chapter, the court
      hearing appeal may exercise the powers exercisable by the court of
      first instance.

223. Synchronization of hearings and judgments: (1) Where various
      parties have made separate appeals against the decision made by the
      lower court on the same case, hearings of all appeals shall be
      synchronized and judgment passed as so held.

             (2)    Even though, in making a decision pursuant to sub-
      section (1), any appeal has already been decided for any reason, the
      case shall be adjudged upon the remaining appeals as so held as if
      such appeal were not adjudged previously.




                                     640
                                Chapter-20

                      Revision and Review of Cases

224. Revision of cases: (1) If the concerned party makes a petition to the
      Supreme Court within thirty days, excluding the time required for
      journey, after the date of a judgment or final order, setting out that
      such a judgment or final order made by the Appellate Court on a case
      not appealable to the Supreme Court pursuant to law contains any of
      the following circumstances, the Supreme Court may conduct the
      revision of the judgment or final order made by the Appellate Court:

            (a)    If the judgment or final order involves error in the
                   interpretation of the Constitution or law,

            (b)    If any legal principle established by the Supreme Court
                   has not been followed or has been applied with wrong
                   interpretation;
            (c)    If irrelevant law has been used;
            (d)    If any government or public property is misappropriated
                   or any loss is caused to such a property or ownership or
                   possession of a person is established in an unauthorized
                   manner over such a property due to lack of proper and
                   exact evaluation of the evidence contained in the case file
                   of a case involving dispute relating to such government
                   or public property.
             (2)   If a petition is received for the revision of a case pursuant
      to sub-section (1), the Supreme Court shall conduct hearings on




                                     641
     whether the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1) exists in the
     judgment or final order of the Appellate Court or not.

           (3)    If, on conducting hearing pursuant to sub-section (2), it
     appears that the judgment or final order of the Appellate Court
     contains the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), the Supreme
     Court shall order the presence of the other parties of such a case in
     order to conduct the revision of the case.

           (4)    If the other parties of the case appear pursuant to sub-
     section (3), the Supreme Court shall also conduct hearing for revision,
     also in presence of them, and pass judgment on the case.

225. Power to review: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
     in this Code, the Supreme Court may review its judgment or final
     order in any of the following circumstances:
           (a)    If the party has come to discover or know any evidence
                  or fact likely to materially affect the judgment or final
                  order only after the judgment or final order has been
                  made,
            (b)   If it appears that the judgment or final order has been
                  passed contrary to the precedent or legal principle
                  enunciated by the Supreme Court prior to the passing of
                  the judgment or final order, as the case may be.
           (2)    If any circumstance referred to in sub-section (1) exists in
     the judgment or final order made by the Supreme Court, the party of
     case may make a petition, setting out the reasons, to the Supreme
     Court for review within thirty five days of the knowledge by no later



                                    642
     than one year after the date of the passing of the judgment or final
     order.

              (3)   If, on examining the petition received pursuant to sub-
     section (2), it contents seem to be reasonable, the Supreme Court shall
     make an order to review the case.

              (4)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, the Supreme Court shall not review its judgment or final
     order in any of the following circumstances:

              (a)   If the judgment or final order has once been reviewed in
                    accordance with law,
              (b)   If the questions raised by the petition for review were
                    also raised in the Division Bench of the Supreme Court
                    and they were heard by the Full Bench because the
                    Judges were divided in their opinions thereon, and
                    decision was already made by addressing those questions,
              (c)   If the case has already been settled by way of revision
                    pursuant   to   the    prevailing   law   prior   to   the
                    commencement of this Code,
              (d)   If the judgment of the Appellate Court has been upheld in
                    the case reviewed pursuant to Section 224.
226. Case to be settled being confined to relevant matters: In
     conducting the revision of a case pursuant to Section 224 or review of
     a case pursuant to Section 225, the case shall be adjudicated being
     confined only to such grounds and relevant matters as on which the




                                     643
     Supreme Court has made an order to revise or review the case, as the
     case may be.


                                 Chapter-21

            Provisions Relating to Mutual Legal Assistance

227. Power to make order to serve summons: (1) If, on any case filed in
     a court, any summons is to be served on any person who is living or
     residing in a foreign country, the court may make an order for that
     purpose.

           (2)      If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
     shall make a submission, accompanied by the following matters, to
     the central body to serve such a summons on the person who is living
     or residing in a foreign country:

           (a)      Full name of the person on whom the summons has to be
                    served,

           (b)      The country where the person as referred to in clause (a)
                    is living or residing, the local address of him/her and
                    other description setting out his/her identity (his/her
                    passport number, identity card number etc.),

           (c)      If the summons cannot be served on the address of the
                    person as referred to in clause (a), the country of the
                    enterprise where he/she works or which he/she operates,
                    and the address thereof,




                                      644
      (d)   Details in relation to which case the summons has to be
            served.

      Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      "central body" means any such body as may be designated by
      the Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.

      (3)   Where a submission is made pursuant to sub-section (2),
the central body shall translate the court order and the details in the
English language and make a request to the concerned country
through diplomatic channels.

      (4)   If, in making a request pursuant to sub-section (3), any
treaty has not been concluded with such a country for that purpose and,
for the service of such a summons in the concerned country, any
assurance has to be made by Nepal to the effect that the summons of
similar nature issued by the competent court of such a country in the
future will be served in Nepal on the basis of reciprocity, the central
body may make such assurance through diplomatic channels.

      (5)   If information is received from the country requested for
pursuant to sub-section (3) that the summons has been served on the
concerned person, the summons shall be deemed to have been duly
served on that person.

      (6)   If the country requested for pursuant to sub-section (3)
refuses to serve the summons or such a country gives information to
the central body through diplomatic channels that the summons has
not been served for the reason that such a person could not be found
or identified, the contents of such summons shall be published in a



                               645
     daily newspaper of national circulation in the country where such a
     person is living or residing or in Nepal.

           (7)    Where a summons is served pursuant to sub-section (6),
     the summons shall be deemed to have been duly served.

228. Request may be made to effect service of judicial document issued
     by foreign court: (1) If any judicial document issued by a foreign
     court has to be served on any person who is residing or living in Nepal,
     the concerned foreign country shall, pursuant to the order of such a
     court, make a request to the central body through diplomatic channels.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     "judicial document" means any such document like a summons, plaint
     or statement of claims, petition or memorandum of appeal issued by
     any foreign court.

           (2)    The request referred to in sub-section (1) shall state the
     following matters:

           (a)    The foreign court making order to serve the judicial
                  document in Nepal,

           (b)    Details of the case in the context of which such order has
                  been made,

           (c)    Details of the judicial document to be served,

           (d)    The name, surname, address of, and other necessary
                  details to identify, the person on whom the document
                  referred to in sub-section (1) has to be served,




                                     646
            (e)    Details of which procedure or manner has to be followed
                   to effect the service of such a judicial document.

            (3)    The request referred to in sub-section (1) has to be
      accompanied by a memorandum set down for the service of the
      judicial document in the format set forth in Schedule-23 and the
      document to be served.

            (4)    The request and the judicial document to be served or its
      authentic copy referred to in sub-section (3) has to be in duplicate.

229. Service of judicial document: (1) Upon receipt of a request referred
      to in Section 228, the central body shall study whether the request of a
      foreign court meets the requisite terms or not and whether any judicial
      document can be served in Nepal accordingly or not.

            (2)    If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
      that the judicial document issued by such a foreign court cannot be
      served in Nepal, the central body shall give information, accompanied
      by the reasons for the same, to the concerned country through
      diplomatic channels.

            (3)    If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
      appropriate to serve the judicial document issued by such a foreign
      court in Nepal pursuant to the request by the foreign court, the central
      body shall request the concerned court to serve such a document.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      "concerned court" means the district court of the area where the
      person on whom the judicial document has to be served is residing or
      living.


                                      647
            (4)    If a court is requested by the central body to serve any
      judicial document pursuant to sub-section (3), the court shall proceed
      to serve such a judicial document as if the judicial proceeding were
      sub judice in that court.

            (5)   In serving a judicial document pursuant to sub-section (4),
      it shall be served in accordance with Chapter-8.

            (6)    If, in effecting the service pursuant to sub-section (5),
      any judicial document has to be served in pursuant of any specific
      procedure or manner as per the request of the foreign court and
      request is made accordingly by the central body, the concerned court
      shall also pursue such procedures or manner.

            (7)    After the service of any judicial document pursuant to
      sub-section (5) or (6), the concerned court shall prepare a description
      of the service of such a document in the format set forth in Schedule-
      24 and forward it to the central body.

            (8)    If the details of service received pursuant to sub-section
      (7) has to be translated into the English language as per the request of
      the foreign court, the central body shall translate it and certify the
      original copy received from the concerned court and the translated
      copy and send the same to the requesting foreign country through
      diplomatic channels.

230. Taking of evidence abroad: (1) If, on any case that is sub judice in a
      court, it is necessary to take any evidence outside Nepal, the court
      may make an order for that purpose.




                                     648
           (2)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     concerned court shall make a submission to the central body.

           (3)    Where a submission is made by the court pursuant to
     sub-section (2), the central body shall set down the details of evidence
     to be taken in the form set forth in Schedule-25 and make a request to
     the concerned country, through diplomatic channels, to effect the
     taking of evidence by the concerned authority of that country.

           (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if a request has been made to effect the taking of an evidence
     pursuant to this Section and the concerned foreign country has refused
     to take evidence or the evidence has not been taken by the competent
     authority of such a country, nothing shall bar the adjudging of the case
     by examining the other available evidence by that reason only.

231. Power to take evidence as per request of foreign court: (1) If any
     evidence has to be taken in Nepal in relation to any case that is sub
     judice in any foreign court or body, such court shall make a request to
     the central body through diplomatic channels.

            (2)   The request referred to in sub-section (1) for taking an
     evidence shall state the following matters:

           (a)    The foreign court or body making request to effect the
                  taking of evidence,

           (b)    Where the court or body requested to effect the taking of
                  evidence in Nepal is identified, details thereof,




                                    649
           (c)   Nature of the case in relation to which request is made to
                 effect the taking of evidence,

           (d)   Details of the parties of the case and their attorneys or
                 representatives,

           (e)   Details of the evidence or other judicial action to be
                 taken in Nepal,

           (f)   If any witness has to be examined in Nepal, the name,
                 surname and address of such a witness,

           (g)   If any witness has to be examined in Nepal by a letter
                 rogetory, the details of interrogatories to be asked to
                 him/her,

           (h)   Whether the witness has to take an oath on making
                 deposition, the details thereof,

           (i)   If any inspection, survey, measurement, map or
                 examination of any document, movable or immovable
                 property has to be made in Nepal, the details thereof,

           (j)   Other necessary details.

232. Request to be in Nepali language: A request made to take evidence
     pursuant to Section 231 shall be set down in the Nepali language.

           Provided that if a request is set down in any foreign language
     and it is not practicable to translate it into the Nepali language and,
     upon showing the reasons for the same, the original copy in the
     English language or its formal translation in English from another




                                    650
     language is attached, such a request shall be acceptable to the central
     body or the concerned court, as the case may be.

233. To be sent to the concerned court: (1) Upon receipt of a request
     referred to in Section 231, the central body shall study whether it is
     appropriate to take evidence in Nepal or not.

           (2)   If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
     appropriate to take evidence in Nepal pursuant to the request by the
     foreign country, the central body shall request the concerned court to
     take evidence in accordance with the request.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
     "concerned court" means the following court to take the following
     evidence:

           (a)   Where any witness has to be examined or replies to the
                 letter rogetory prepared, the district court of the area
                 where such a witness or person is residing or living,

           (b)   Where any inspection, survey, measurement, map or
                 examination of any movable or immovable property has
                 to be made or the description thereof prepared, the
                 district court of the area where such a property is situated,

           (c)   Where details relating to any document has to be set out,
                 the district court of the area where the government or
                 non-government office or the person in custody of that
                 document is situated or is living or residing.




                                    651
              (3)   If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
     that the evidence cannot be taken in Nepal as per the request, the
     central body shall give information thereof, setting out details thereof,
     to the concerned authority of the requesting country, through the
     diplomatic channels.

234. The concerned court to take evidence: (1) If        the   central   body
     request the concerned court to take evidence of any matter as per the
     request of a foreign court pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 233,
     the concerned court shall proceed to take such evidence as if such an
     evidence were taken on the proceedings of any case sub-judice in that
     court.

              (2)   Where a time-limit has to be given to any witness or
     person to appear before the court pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     concerned court shall give the time-limit of a maximum of seven days,
     excluding the time required for journey, and such a summons of time-
     limit shall be served in accordance with Chapter-8.

              (3)   In taking evidence pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     concerned court shall take evidence being confined to such matter as
     on which the witness has to be examined or to such interrogatories as
     on which replies of letter regotary have to be prepared or to such
     evidence, document or movable or immovable property as the
     description of which has to be given, as per the request of the foreign
     court.

              (4)   If, in examining a witness or preparing replies of a letter
     regotary or examining a document or evidence, the parties of the case



                                      652
     on which evidence is to be taken pursuant to this Section or their
     attorneys or law practitioners wish to appear before the court, the
     concerned may grant a leave to such parties, attorneys or law
     practitioners to appear before the court at the time of taking evidence.

             (5)   In taking evidence pursuant to this Section, the concerned
     court shall apply the laws of Nepal.

             Provided that if the foreign court has made a request to take
     evidence of any specific subject by adopting any specific procedures
     or manner on any specific matter and it is requested by the central
     body to take evidence accordingly, the concerned court shall have to
     take evidence accordingly.

235. To send evidence taken to foreign court: (1) The concerned court
     shall send the evidence taken pursuant to Section 234 to the central
     body.

             (2)   If the evidence received pursuant to sub-section (1) has to
     be translated into any foreign language as per the request of the
     foreign court, the central body shall translate it accordingly and send
     the same to the foreign court through diplomatic channels.

236. Expenditure to be borne:          If any expenditure to be incurred in
     serving a summons or taking any request in pursuance of a request
     made by a foreign court pursuant to this Chapter, the requesting court
     shall bear such an expenditure.

237. Recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments: (1) Any
     judgment made by a court of any foreign country shall be recognized




                                     653
in Nepal and may be enforced in Nepal, in the following
circumstance:

      (a)   If such a judgment has been made by a competent court
            with proper jurisdiction,

      (b)   If such a judgment is enforceable in the concerned
            country,

      (c)   If such a judgment is final and not subject to review in
            accordance with the law of the concerned country.

      (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the judgment made by the court of foreign country shall not be
recognized and enforced in Nepal in the following circumstance:

      (a)   If such a judgment seems to be deceptive or fraudulent
            from procedural viewpoint,

      (b)   If there has been filed and sub judice in a court of Nepal
            a case between the same parties for the same fact and
            purpose as on which such a judgment has been passed,
            prior to the case being filed in the foreign court,

      (c)   If the case referred to in clause (b) has already been
            adjudged by a court of Nepal,

      (d)   If the case referred to in clause (b) has been adjudged by
            a court of another country, and such a judgment has been
            recognized and already enforced or being in the process
            of enforcement in Nepal,




                               654
           (e)    If such a judgment has been passed without giving
                  adequate opportunity to any party of the case to represent
                  himself or herself fairly,

           (f)    If such a judgment seems to have been passed without
                  following due process required for the proceedings of a
                  case.

238. Petition to be made for enforcement of judgment passed by
     foreign court: (1) Any party who wishes to have a judgment passed
     by a foreign court recognized and enforced in Nepal has to make a
     petition, accompanied by the following documents, to the concerned
     appellate court:

           (a)    A full and certified text of the judgment,

           (b)    If the judgment has been made in the absence of any
                  party of the case, the original or certified copy of the
                  document establishing that the summons has been duly
                  issued on such a party,

           (c)    All documents establishing that the judgment has
                  fulfilled the terms as referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of
                  sub-section (1) of Section 237,

           (d)    Where the judgment is not set down in the Nepalese
                  language, a Nepalese translated version of the judgment,
                  along with certification by the diplomatic or consul
                  representative or by a person authorized to do formal
                  translation of the judgment.




                                     655
           (2)    If a petition referred to in sub-section (1) is received, the
     appellate court, upon studying such a petition, is satisfied that the
     judgment passed by a foreign court fulfills the terms as referred to in
     sub-section (1) of Section 237 and that there is no reason to refuse to
     recognize it pursuant to sub-section (2) of the same Section, the court
     shall forward the judgment passed by the foreign court to the
     concerned district court to recognize and enforce it.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
     "concerned district court" means the district court of the area/territory
     where any amount in question, partition and foreclosure, as well, have
     to be recovered, effected or made, as the case may be, pursuant to the
     judgment.

239. Judgment to be executed by district court: If so written by the
     appellate court pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 238, the
     concerned district court shall enforce the judgment as if it were one
     passed by itself.

240. Compromise between parties: (1) If a petition is made for the
     enforcement of a foreign judgment in Nepal pursuant to Section 238,
     and the parties wish to enter into a compromise by enforcing the
     judgment with mutual consent, they may make a joint petition to the
     concerned court, setting out the details including the terms and
     conditions of such compromise.

           (2)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     concerned court shall effect compromise to enforce the judgment with
     the consent in pursuance of the petition.



                                    656
           (3)    If compromise is effected pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     concerned parties shall enforce the judgment in pursuance of the
     mutual consent.

241. Non-enforcement in absence of treaty: (1) In     order   to   serve   a
     summons issued by a court of any foreign country in Nepal, take
     evidence in Nepal at the request of any foreign court or enforce a
     judgment passed by a court of any foreign country in Nepal, there
     shall be a bilateral treaty concluded between Nepal and such a foreign
     country.

           (2)    If any treaty has not been concluded pursuant to sub-
     section (1), notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Chapter, a summons issued by such a court cannot be served,
     evidence cannot be taken at the request of such a court or a judgment
     passed by such a court cannot be enforced in Nepal.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
     any foreign country makes a request, through diplomatic channels, to
     the Government of Nepal for the service of a summons issued by a
     court of a foreign country on any specific case or for the taking of
     evidence as per the request of the court of such a country, and that
     country gives assurances through diplomatic channels that it will
     serve a summons issued by any court of Nepal on similar type of case
     or take evidence as per the request of any court of Nepal in that
     country in the future, the summons issued by the court of such a
     country can be served or evidence can be taken at the request of that
     court on the basis of reciprocity.



                                     657
            (4)    Where assurance has been made or summons served or
     evidence taken pursuant to sub-section (3), the central body shall
     maintain records thereof.

242. Non-enforcement: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
     this Chapter, if it would be contrary to public order or sovereignty of
     Nepal in serving a summons issued by a court of any foreign country
     in Nepal or taking evidence in Nepal at the request of such a court or
     enforcing a judgment passed by such a court or as a result of such
     service or enforcement, no such summons may be served, evidence
     taken or judgment enforced.


                                 Chapter-22

                            Execution of Judgments

243. Records to be prepared: (1)      Where any judgment is made by the
     court ordering the foreclosure, entry into records, striking off of
     records, transmission, preemption, partition, recovery of amount in
     question, realization of fine or court fees, the concerned court shall, as
     soon as possible, prepare the records thereof and forward the same to
     the bailiff section.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
     "amount in question" means any amount including compensation as
     required to be recovered pursuant to the judgment.

            (2)    Upon receipt of the records pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the concerned employee shall create a separate case-file on it,




                                     658
     accompanied by a copy of the judgment, for the purpose of the
     execution of judgment.

            (3)   Where the records referred to in sub-section (2) are
     prepared by the court hearing appeal, the concerned employee shall
     forward the case-file, accompanied by the records, to the concerned
     district court within a period of seven days of the preparation of the
     judgment.

244. Execution by concerned district court: (1) The district court where
     the plaint or complaint has been filed shall execute the judgment
     passed on such a case irrespective of the level of court passing the
     judgment.

            (2)   The concerned district court shall execute the judgment
     on a case originally tried and settled by the court hearing appeal.

            (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if the district court executing the judgment cannot be
     ascertained owing to the subject-matter of the case, the district court
     designated by the court hearing appeal shall execute the judgment of
     that case.

            Provided that the judgment passed by any authority other than
     the regular court shall be executed by the concerned authority.

245. Postponement of execution of judgment: Notwithstanding anything
     contained in Section 243, the court shall postpone the execution of
     judgment in the following circumstance:




                                    659
          (a)   If an appeal is made in a case which is appealable
                pursuant to law, until the case is finally disposed on
                appeal,

          (b)   If no such appeal is made, until the period allowed for
                preferring appeal is expired;

          (c)   If an order is made to summon the presence of parties in
                the court of revision of case pursuant to Section 224,
                until it is disposed,

          (d)   If an order is made to make the review of a case pursuant
                to Section 225, until it is finally disposed.

246. Not to bar execution of judgment or deed of compromise:
    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
    nothing shall bar the execution of judgment or deed of compromise in
    the following circumstance:

          (a)   In cases where a case is sub judice in a court in
                pursuance of a petition made by a party to have a
                judgment on any case reviewed or revised, except as
                otherwise ordered by the court, to execute the judgment
                passed on that case by the reason only that such a petition
                has been made,

          (b)   Even though a case to withhold a judgment or a deed of
                compromise is filed by any one, except as otherwise
                ordered by the court, to execute the judgment or deed of
                compromise on that case,




                                   660
           (c)    If it appears that the property remaining as the subject
                  matter of a case will get damaged if the judgment of any
                  case is not executed immediately or if the winning party
                  of a case involving payment of compensation makes a
                  written commitment to bear compensation for any loss
                  caused to the other party if the winning party looses the
                  case on appeal subsequently, to execute such a judgment
                  by the court prior to the expiration of the time-limit for
                  appeal in such a case or prior to passing of judgment on
                  appeal,

           (d)    If the parties of case agree on some matters of any case
                  that is sub judice in the court and the matters so agreed
                  can be separated and executed accordingly, and order is
                  made by the court to that effect.

147. Appointment of attorney: If any party of the case is not able to
     appear in person in the course of execution of judgment, such a party
     may assign and send an attorney for that purpose.

148. Opportunity to be given to enter into compromise or mediation:
     (1)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
     if the parties wish to execute the judgment through a compromise or
     mediation, they may make a joint petition, setting out that matter, to
     the court.

           Provided that no petition may be made for compromise or
     mediation on the matter of recovery of a government amount in
     question.



                                    661
           (2)    If a petition is received from the parties for compromise
     or mediation pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall specify the
     period of execution and provide them with an opportunity to execute
     the judgment through a compromise or mediation.

           (3)    If the parties agree to execute the judgment through a
     compromise or mediation within the period given pursuant to sub-
     section (2), the court shall effect the compromise between the parties
     in accordance with law.

           (4)    If the parties do not agree to execute the judgment
     through a compromise or mediation within the period given pursuant
     to sub-section (2), the court shall have to execute the judgment in
     pursuance of the procedures as referred to in this Chapter.

249. Parties to remain on recognizance: (1) Where the court of first
     instance passing judgment on a case passes judgment ordering the
     foreclosure, entry into records, striking off of records, transmission,
     preemption, partition and recovery of amount in question, among
     others and the parties of case are present in the court, the court shall
     so appoint the due date for the parties to make presence for the
     purpose of executing the judgment that the date falls after the period
     of expiration of the time-limit for appeal.

           (2)    If an appeal is made on the case by the date appointed
     pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall discontinue the
     recognizance of the parties.

           (3)    Where a final judgment is made also by the court hearing
     appeal to do as set forth in sub-section (1) and the parties of a case are



                                     662
     present in the court, the court shall appoint the due date for the parties
     to make presence for the purpose of executing the judgment and ask
     the parties to make presence before the concerned court of first
     instance and send the case-file to the latter court if the parties of the
     case are not present in the court.

            (4)   If the parties of case make presence before the court of
     first instance pursuant to sub-section (3), the court shall hold the
     parties who are present on recognizance for the purpose of executing
     the judgment.

            (5)   If intimation is received from the court hearing appeal
     that the parties are not on recognizance pursuant to sub-section (3),
     parties are not present on the appointed due date or the case becomes
     final upon the judgment of court not being appealed and the parties of
     a case are not present in the court, the court of first instance shall issue
     a summons of twenty one days in the form set forth in Schedule-23
     for the parties to make presence in the court for the purpose of
     executing the judgment.

            (6)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if it is not necessary to hold any party on recognizance in the
     course of execution of judgment, the court shall not hold such a party
     on recognizance.

250. Power to execute judgment upon collecting additional fees: (1) If a
     party of a case shows up for the execution of judgment after the
     expiration of the time-limit for the undertaking to continue the case or
     the extension of the expired time-limit, the court shall execute the



                                      663
      judgment by collecting the additional fees of ten percent of the fees
      chargeable for the execution of judgment if it is within six months of
      the expiration of the time-limit and of twenty five percent thereof if it
      is within one year of such expiration.

            (2)    If the party is not present to have a judgment executed
      even within the period as referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall
      close the proceedings relating to the execution of such a judgment,
      except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.

251. Continuity of case or extension of expired due date: (1) If any party
      of the case dies in the course of execution of a judgment, his/her heir
      may undertake to continue such a case pursuant to this Code.

            (2)    If any party of the case expires the appointed due date in
      the course of execution of a judgment, he/she may extend the expired
      appointed due date pursuant to this Code.

252. Procedures for effecting foreclosure: (1) If, in the course of
      foreclosing in pursuance of a judgment, the party shall be caused to
      pay to the court three percent of the amount in question of the
      property subject to foreclosure if such an amount is set out as fees
      prior to the deputation of a commission for the foreclosure effected by
      the court.

            (2)    If the party entitled to foreclosure pays the amount to the
      court within the time referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall on
      the same day of payment of amount appoint the day on which a
      commission to effect foreclosure is to be dispatched and give a notice
      thereof to the parties and appoint the due date for them to make



                                     664
presence at the place where the foreclosure is to be effected; and if the
person to allow the foreclosure is not on recognizance, the court shall
also give a notice of that matter to such a party.

      (3)     In appointing the due date or giving notice pursuant to
sub-section (2), if the property to be foreclosed is a house or land, a
notice shall also be given to vacate such a house or land.

      (4)    If the property to be foreclosed is in possession or
custody of a person other than the parties of the case, the court shall
also give a notice to such a person to appear at the place where the
commission is deputed.

      (5)    The court shall depute a commission on the day
appointed pursuant to sub-section (2) and foreclose such a property in
pursuance of the judgment.

      (6)    If the direction or side of any house or land to be
foreclosed in pursuance of the judgment is not set out, the court shall
effect the foreclosure of such a house or land by lot upon making
proportionate division in presence of the parties.

      (7)    In effecting the foreclosure pursuant to this Section, the
court shall effect it in presence of the party obliged to allow the
foreclosure and the party entitled to the foreclosure or their
representatives and in witness of a representative of the local body
and at least two witnesses.

      (8)    If the person obliged to allow the foreclosure or any other
person causes obstruction or hindrance to the foreclosure, the court
shall effect the foreclosure by using force as required.


                                665
      (9)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the house or shop containing the property to be foreclosed
is locked up and the person in possession or custody of the house or
shop to be foreclosed is present, the foreclosure shall be effected by
asking the person to open the house or shop; and if such a person is
not present, a notice, in the format set forth in Schedule-27, shall be
affixed to the door of that house or shop, thereby requiring that person
to vacate the house or shop within fifteen days.

      (10) If the concerned person does not open the key of the
house or shop within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (9), the
court shall after the expiration of such a time-limit effect the
foreclosure of the house or shop by breaking the lock of such a house
or shop.

      (11) If any property is found within the house or shop in the
course of effecting foreclose pursuant to this Section, the court shall at
the same time prepare an inventory of the property and may take
control of such property.

      (12) If the concerned person does not show up to receive the
property taken in control pursuant to sub-section (11) within thirty
five days, the court shall auction such a property and immediately
hand over the proceeds of auction to the concerned person.

      (13) If the concerned person refuses to receive immediately
the proceeds of auction made pursuant to sub-section (12), the court
shall credit such proceeds into the deposit account.




                                666
       (14) If the concerned person shows up to receive the amount
within one year after the crediting of the amount into the deposit
account pursuant to sub-section (13), the court shall refund the
amount remaining after deduction of ten percent therefrom to such a
person.

       (15) If the concerned person does not show up to receive such
an amount within the period referred to in sub-section (14), the court
shall credit such an amount to the government fund.

       (16) Where foreclosure is effected once but any person makes
hindrance and does not allow the foreclosure of the property, the court
shall punish such a person with a fine of up to twenty five thousand
rupees or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months
for each instance, and again effect the foreclosure in relation to the
property previously foreclosed in accordance with the judgment. No
fee shall be payable for effecting foreclosure in such a case.

       (17) If the property to be foreclosed is situated in another
territory, the court shall appoint the due date for the concerned parties
for effecting foreclosure and send the case file and parties to the
district court of such a territory.

       (18) If a request is made to effect the foreclosure pursuant to
sub-section (17), the concerned court shall effect the foreclosure
pursuant to law and give information thereof to that court.

       (19) After the foreclosure has been effected by the court
pursuant to this Section, the court shall give a documentary evidence
thereof to the party entitled to the foreclosure.



                                 667
           (20) The court shall complete the effecting of foreclosure
     within six months after the presence of the parties in the court.

253. Procedures for effecting entry into and striking off of records and
     transmission: (1) If, in the course of making entry into and striking
     of records and transmission, in pursuance of a judgment, the party
     entitled to obtain the same is in attendance in the court pursuant to
     Section 249, the court shall write the matter to the office making entry
     into and striking off of records and transmission for the purpose of
     the execution of the judgment and send that party to that office within
     twenty one days.

           (2)     If so written pursuant to sub-section (1) or the concerned
     party appears in the office, such an office shall effect the making of
     entry into and striking off of records and transmission in pursuance of
     the judgment.

           (3)    If any party appears in the concerned office to obtain
     entry into and striking off of records and transmission after the
     expiration of the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (1), the office
     shall effect the making of entry into and striking off of records and
     transmission in pursuance of the judgment, by collecting the fees of
     five hundred rupees for each year.

254. Procedures relating to preemption: (1) If, in the course of making
     or allowing preemption in pursuance of a judgment, any party is on
     recognizance pursuant to Section 249, the court shall appoint the due
     date for such a party to make presence to obtain the preemption of the




                                     668
property subject to preemption or receive a deposited amount and
send the party to the office where the amount is deposited.

      (2)    If both parties to obtain and allow preemption make
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall hand
over the deposited amount to the person obliged to allow preemption
and deliver the deed of that property and receipt thereof to the person
entitled to obtain preemption.

      (3)    If only the person obliged to allow preemption makes
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall hand
over the amount to him/her pursuant to sub-section (2) and deliver the
documents including the receipt of payment of the amount to the
person entitled to obtain preemption as and when that person makes
presence subsequently.

      (4)    If only the person entitled to obtain preemption makes
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall
effect the preemption in pursuance of the judgment and deliver the
documents including the payment of amount to him/her.

      (5)    If preemption is effected by the office pursuant to this
Section, the person obliged to allow preemption shall receive the
deposited amount within thirty five days after that date.

      (6)    If the person obliged to allow preemption shows up to
receive the deposited amount within two years after the expiration of
the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (5), the office shall return
the amount remaining after deduction of three percent of the deposited
amount therefrom to such a person.



                                 669
            (7)    If the person obliged to allow preemption does not show
      up to receive the deposited amount even within the time-limit as
      referred to in sub-section (6), the office shall credit such a deposited
      amount to the government fund, as a governmental revenue.

255. Procedures for setting aside partition: (1) If, in the course of setting
      aside the partition in pursuance of a judgment, the parties are on
      recognizance pursuant to Section 249, the court shall effect partition
      by setting aside partition shares within six months.

            (2)    If a judgment is made to set aside partition to more than
      one coparcener and any coparcener is not present, the court shall serve
      a fifteen-day summons, in the form set forth in Schedule-28, on the
      coparcener failing to make presence.

            (3)    If the concerned coparcener makes presence within the
      time-limit as referred to in sub-section (2), the court shall set aside
      partition shares and effect partition in presence of all coparceners.

            (4)    If all coparceners entitled to receive partition do not
      make presence within the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (2),
      the court shall set aside partition shares of the coparceners failing to
      make presence and effect partition share of the coparceners who make
      presence.

            (5)    If partition is effected pursuant to sub-section (4), the
      person failing to make presence within the time-limit shall not be
      entitled to file a suit on the matter of making partition or higher or
      lower grade or value of the partition share.




                                      670
      (6)    If partition is to be effected by sending a commission, the
court shall effect partition by sending an employee.

      (7)    In the course of setting aside partition shares pursuant to
this Section, the coparceners who are obliged to give partition in
pursuance of the judgment or the coparceners who take custody of the
property set forth in the inventory, their representatives or other major
persons living with them in an undivided family shall produce the
property subject to partition and as set forth in the inventory.

      (8)    If the person giving partition or taking custody of the
property is not found or any major person living in the undivided
family does not produce all properties as set forth in the inventory, the
court shall serve a summons, in the form set forth in Schedule-29 on
the person giving, and taking custody of, the partition share.

      (9)    If the person giving partition or taking custody of the
property fails to make presence within the time-limit as referred to in
sub-section (8) or does not show the property subject to partition
despite making presence, the court shall effect partition as per the
inventory by opening any property, if any closed, in witness of a
member or representative of the local body and at least two
representatives.

      (10) If the parties fail to make presence within the time-limit
as referred to in sub-section (2) or (8), the court shall set aside
partition shares and commence the partition proceedings in pursuance
of the judgment within three days after the expiration of the time-limit.




                                671
       (11) If any party makes presence in the court after the time-
limit given pursuant to sub-section (8) and the partition making is not
complete by that time, the court shall effect partition also in presence
of him/her.

       (12) If, in the course of making partition, all properties are not
in order as set forth in the inventory, the amount of the shortfall
property shall be ascertained and shall be reimbursed from the
partition share of the partition giver or the person taking custody of
the property. If the partition share is not recovered even from such a
reimbursement, recovery shall be made from any other property
owned and possessed by such a person to the person receiving
partition, in consideration for such shortfall portion.

       (13) If, in the course of effecting partition, the person
receiving partition or a major member living with him/her in an
undivided family refuses to receive his/her partition share and any
perishable property is subject to partition, the court shall auction such
a property. If the concerned person shows up to receive the proceeds
of such auction subsequently, the court shall return the amount
remaining after deducting fifteen percent thereof to him/her.

       (14) If the persons receiving partition do not agree as to the
property subject to partition, the court shall divide such a property on
proportionate of higher or lower value or grade and effect partition by
lot.

       (15) If any person does not show or produce the property in
his/her custody as mentioned in the inventory, the court shall fine that



                                672
      person with a sum of five percent of the amount in question of the
      property not so shown or produced.

            (16) In a case where final judgment is passed holding the
      plaintiff entitled to partition, if the other defendant coparceners also
      make a petition to set aside and receive their respective partition
      shares, the court shall collect court fees chargeable by law and set
      aside such partition shares from the property as held by judgment and
      cause the same to be provided to them.

            (17) If the property subject to partition is situated also in
      another territory, the court shall write to the concerned court to effect
      partition of such property.

            (18) If so written pursuant to sub-section (17), the concerned
      court shall also effect partition pursuant to this Section and give
      information thereof to such a court.

256. Procedures for recovery of amount in question: (1) If, in the course
      of recovering amount in question in pursuance of a judgment, the
      party entitled to recovery of amount in question is on recognizance
      pursuant to Section 249, the court shall cause a deed to be executed by
      such a party as to whether that party is willing to have recovery of the
      amount in question or not.

            (2)    If, in executing a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      party entitled to recovery of the amount in question is not willing to
      have recovery of the amount in question, the court shall, on the same
      day, terminate the judgment execution proceeding and cross off the
      records of amount in question.



                                       673
      (3)    If, in executing a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
party entitled to recovery of the amount in question desires to have
recovery of the amount in question and the party obliged to pay the
amount in question is on recognizance, the court shall give a time
limit of a maximum of thirty five days to that party to pay the amount
in question as required to be paid in pursuance of the judgment.

      (4)    The party obliged to pay the amount in question shall
furnish an amount equal to the amount in question with the court in
cash or through a good for payment cheque or any other instrument
within the time given pursuant to sub-section (3).

      (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
the party entitled to recovery of amount in question may make a
request to the court to have recover of the amount in question from
any property of him/her.

      (6)    If the party liable to recovery of amount in question is not
present in the court or despite being present refuses to pay the amount
in consideration of the amount in question or fails to show a property
pursuant to sub-section (5), the party entitled to recovery of the
amount in question may, showing the property of the party liable to
pay the amount in question, make a petition to the court to have the
recovery of the amount in question from such a property.

      (7)    If, in recovering the amount in question pursuant to this
Section, any property has to be attached, the court shall attach such a
property as required and effect the recovery of the amount in question
by also auctioning such a property as required.



                               674
      (8)    If the proceeds of auction sale of the property made
pursuant to sub-section (7) exceed the amount in question, the court
shall immediately return such excess amount to the party liable to pay
the amount in question if he/she is present.

      (9)    If the concerned party refuses to receive the amount
pursuant to sub-section (8), the court shall credit that amount into the
deposit account.

      (10) If the concerned person does not show up to receive the
amount credited into the deposited account within two years after the
date of crediting thereinto, that amount shall be paid to the
government fund, as a governmental revenue.

      (11) If the party liable to pay the amount in question is living
or residing in another territory, the court shall write to the concerned
court to effect recovery of the amount in question.

      (12) If so written pursuant to sub-section (11), the concerned
court shall also effect recovery of the amount in question pursuant to
this Section and give information thereof to such a court.

      (13) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the party liable to recovery of amount in question discovers
the concealment or hiding of any property by the party obliged to pay
the amount in question and makes a petition showing the same while
the party obliged to pay the amount in question is alive, the court shall
auction the property and effect the recovery of amount up to the extent
of the amount in question to which he/she is entitled.




                               675
            (14) The court shall, in consideration for effecting the
      recovery of amount in question pursuant to this Section, collect the
      fees of three percent of such amount in question from the party
      entitled to recovery of amount in question.

257. Property subject to confiscation: (1) In       making    confiscation   of
      entire property pursuant to section 256, also the partition shares of
      those who are above twelve years of age and have not separated bread
      and board and have lived together and enjoyed such a property or of
      those who, despite having obtained their respective partition shares or
      separated bread and broad, have lived together while enjoying that
      property shall be subject to the confiscation of entire property.

            (2)    In making confiscation of entire property pursuant to
      sub-section (1), the following property shall be set aside:

            (a)    If any property is in the form of a personal property of a
                   person other than the person subject to confiscation of
                   entire property, such a property,

            (b)    Up to three pairs of clothes and up to three pairs of shoes
                   to be put on by the person subject to confiscation of
                   entire property and his/her undivided family members,

            (c)    Such bare cooking and dining utensils, pots and bare
                   quilt and mattress as required for the person subject to
                   confiscation of entire property and his/her undivided
                   family members,




                                      676
           (d)    Such books as required for the undivided family of the
                  person subject to confiscation of entire property to impart
                  education,

           (e)    Such food as required to maintain livelihood of the
                  person subject to confiscation of entire property and
                  his/her undivided family members for up to three months
                  in maximum,

           (f)    Bare inputs, tool or arms related with the occupation or
                  employment of the person subject to confiscation of
                  entire property and his/her undivided family members,

           (g)    One yoke of oxen for farming.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), in
     setting aside the property pursuant to clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and
     (g) of that sub-section, no property valued at more than thirty
     thousand rupees shall be so set aside.

           (4)    If the amount in question is not recovered in full even
     upon making confiscation of entire property pursuant to sub-section
     (2), no claim shall be made against other family members.

258. Imprisonment for amount in question or fine: (1) If the amount in
     question is not recovered in full even from the auction sale pursuant to
     sub-section (7) of Section 256 and the party entitled to recovery of
     amount in question wishes to subject the party liable to pay the
     amount in question to imprisonment and makes a petition for the same
     within seven days of the auction sale of property, the court shall




                                     677
execute a memorandum thereof and imprison the party liable to pay
the amount in question in accordance with law.

      (2)   In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall convert the remaining amount in question into
imprisonment at the rate of three hundred rupees a day, and imprison
the party liable to pay amount in question equal thereto.

      (3)   In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
no person shall be so imprisoned for more than four years in the case
of an amount in question of the Government of Nepal or a public body
which is owned or controlled by the Government of Nepal in full or
majority and for more than two years in the case of an amount in
question of a particular person or other body.

      (4)    If, in subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section
(1), the amount in question is less than or remains less than three
hundred rupees, the concerned person shall be subjected to
imprisonment for one day for such an amount.

      (5)   In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
the person wishing to effect such imprisonment shall bear the ration
expenses as chargeable pursuant to law.

      (6)    In subjecting to imprisonment for a fine, one shall be so
imprisoned at the rate of one hundred rupees a day.

      (7)    Prior to subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to this
Section, the concerned person shall be given a reasonable time to
present his/her statements.




                               678
            (8)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Chapter, where a person in default of payment of the remaining
      amount in question is subjected by order of the court to imprisonment
      at the request of the party for the remaining amount in question not
      recovered, no claim may be made again on that matter.

259. In the event of death of person liable to pay amount in question:
      (1)   If the person liable to pay the amount in question dies prior to
      the recovery of such amount in question, the amount in question shall
      be recovered from the property in which he/she has right.

            (2)    If the amount in question is not recovered from the
      property in which he/she has right, the shortfall amount in question
      shall be recovered from the person who inherits his/her property.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), in
      recovering the amount in question from the inheritor, no amount in
      excess of that inherited by him/her shall be recovered.

260. Concession in fine: If a person who is sentenced to a fine pursuant to
      a judgment pays the fine immediately or within sixty days of the date
      of passage of judgment, the person shall enjoy twenty percent
      concession in the fine imposed on him/her.

261. Execution of deed of compromise: (1) If any deed of compromise is
      so executed that any act has to be done or caused to be done by any
      government body, the court shall write to the concerned office to do
      the act set forth in the deed of compromise, within three days of the
      execution of the deed of compromise.




                                     679
           (2)    Even though, in a case involving more than one plaintiff
     or defendant, all parties are not present for the execution of the deed
     of compromise, the deed of compromise shall be executed after the
     expiration of the time-limit. In so executing the deed of compromise,
     the interest of the person who does not show up for such compromise
     shall also be protected.

262. Period to get return of court fees, deposits and expenses: (1)
     Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, the concerned person
     shall get return of such court fees and deposits as held to be retuned
     pursuant to judgment within one year after the date of knowledge of
     the final judgment.

           (2)    Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, the person
     entitled to get or return of the proceeds of auction sale shall receive
     such amount within three months after the date of auction sale.

           (3)    If the concerned person does not receive the court fees,
     deposits or amounts within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (1)
     or (2), the person shall not be entitled to get return of such amount
     subsequently.

           (4)    After the expiration of the time-limit referred to in sub-
     section (2), such deposits shall be credited to the government account.

263. Fees chargeable for the execution of judgment: (1) Except as
     otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the court shall collect the fees
     at the rate of ten percent from the recipient of any amount the
     payment of which has been effected by the court pursuant to a




                                    680
     judgment or any other amount and the fees at the rate of five percent
     from the payer of such amount.

           (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     no fees shall be charged for such specification of the deadline for
     repayment of a loan, provision of a document or division of property
     between or among creditors as effected by the court.

264. Complaint may be made: (1) A concerned person who is not
     satisfied with an act or action done or taken by any employee in the
     course of execution of a judgment may make a complaint with the
     judgment of the same court within fifteen days.

           (2)   A person who is not satisfied with a decision made on the
     complaint made pursuant to sub-section (1) may make a petition to the
     court hearing appeal.

           (3)   A complaint made pursuant to sub-section (1) and a
     petition made pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be disposed of within
     one month and two months, respectively.

265. Proceeding not to be void by the reason only the absence of
     representative: (1) If any proceeding has to be carried out in
     presence of a member or representative of the local body or to be
     signed by him/her pursuant to this Chapter and such a member or
     representative does not show up despite serving a written notice for
     his/her presence, the proceeding may be carried out or caused to be
     carried.




                                   681
           (2)    Any proceeding otherwise duly carried out shall not be
     void merely by the reason that a member or representative of the local
     body was not present or refused to sign pursuant to sub-section (1).

266. Power to institute action or impose punishment on contempt: (1)
     It shall be the duty of the parties of a case to assist in the execution of
     judgment pursuant to this Chapter.

           (2)    The court may institute action on contempt of court
     against a person who hinders the execution of judgment in accordance
     with law or impose punishment of a fine of up to one thousand rupees
     or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or both on
     such a person.

267. Employee entitled to incentive: (1) If a government employee who
     is deputed for the recovery of a fine imposed or government amount
     in question in pursuance of judgment does not wish to receive the
     amount for daily and travel allowance, the employee shall be entitled
     to an incentive allowance of thirty percent of the amount recovered.

           (2)    The bailiff (Tahashildar) shall be entitled to seven
     percent of the amount recovered pursuant to sub-section (1).

           (3)    The allowance or amount as referred to in sub-sections
     (1) and (2) shall be chargeable on the amount of fine or government
     recovered.

           (4)    If any person other than a government employee has
     recovered the government amount in question or fine pursuant to this
     Section, the amount as referred to in sub-section (2) may be provided
     that person as if he/she were a government employee.


                                     682
                               Chapter-23

   Provisions Relating to Civil Cases in which Government of Nepal

                           is Plaintiff or Party

268. Investigation and filing of civil cases in which Government of
     Nepal is plaintiff: (1) A person who intends to institute a case set
     forth in Schedule-30 and a civil case which is defined as a civil case
     by the laws in force shall have to make a petition in writing or
     information orally, setting the evidence which is in his/her custody or
     which is available to the best of his/her knowledge and information in
     relation to such a case to the authority specified by the Government of
     Nepal by publishing a notice in the Nepal Gazette or to the concerned
     Landreform Officer where such authority has not been so specified.

           (2)    Where information orally is made pursuant to sub-section
     (1), the concerned authority shall set down the matters of that person
     in the form of a petition and get him/her to sign that document.

           (3)    The concerned authority shall, as required, take
     measurement and mapping of the house or land related with the case
     or make investigation into other necessary matters, and shall, having
     regard to the time required to make decision to or not to institute the
     case and if decision is made to institute the case, the time required to
     frame a plaint and file case, forward the originals of documents in the
     case file and one set of duplicate copies thereof, accompanied by the
     evidence collected and his/her opinion, to the concerned District




                                    683
      Government Attorney for decision to or not to institute case, in
      advance of at least fifteen days of the date of expiration of limitation.

             (4)    Even though a petition is not made by any person
      pursuant to sub-section (1), if the concerned authority himself or
      herself sees any reason to institute a case as referred to in sub-section
      (1), he/she has to collect necessary evidence, complete the procedures
      as referred to in sub-section (3) and forward the case file to the
      Government Attorney of the concerned district.

             (5)    The Government Attorney shall study the case file
      received pursuant to sub-section (3) or (4) and decide to or not to
      institute the case.

             (6)    If decision is made to institute the case pursuant to sub-
      section (5), the Government attorney shall frame a plaint and file it,
      accompanied by the evidence, in the concerned court.

             (7)    If decision is made not to institute the case pursuant to
      sub-section (5), the Government Attorney shall return the received
      case file and evidence to the concerned authority.

269. Case to be instituted as Government of Nepal being plaintiff: The
      cases set forth in Schedule-30 shall be instituted as the Government of
      Nepal being plaintiff in such cases.

             Provided that Section 91 shall apply to the matters in which
      plaint has to be filed pursuant to that Section.

270. In the event of revelation that person is to institute case: (1) If, in
      studying the case file pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 268, it is



                                      684
     revealed that the case is not one that is to be instituted as the
     Government of Nepal being plaintiff but that is to be instituted upon
     making complaint by the aggrieved person himself or herself in
     accordance with law, the Government Attorney shall make decision
     accordingly and inform the authority who has forwarded the case file
     to give a notice indicating that matter to the concerned person.

           (2)    The limitation as referred to in law shall, in the case of
     the concerned person, be counted from the date of receipt of
     information pursuant to sub-section (1).

272. Provisions relating to institution of other civil cases: (1) The
     authority, if any, specified by the concerned law for the institution of
     or collection of evidence on any civil case other than that set forth in
     Schedule-30, and the concerned chief of office, where such an
     authority has not be specified, shall so submit the case file and
     evidence, accompanied by his/her opinion, to the concerned
     Government Attorney for decision to or not to institute the case that
     the limitation for filing the plaint does not get expired.

           (2)    Upon receipt of the case file pursuant to sub-section (1),
     the Government Attorney shall make decision to or not to institute the
     case, and if so decided as to institute the case, shall also mention as to
     whom the case is to be instituted against, on which matter and under
     which law and send the case file back in a manner that the limitation
     for filing the case does not get expired.

           (3)    If decision is made by the Government Attorney to
     institute the case pursuant to sub-section (2), the authority who is



                                     685
     competent by law to that effect shall frame a plaint, sign it and file the
     case in the concerned court within the limitation, and a copy of the
     case file of such a case has to be provided to the Government
     Attorney.

273. Provision relating to limitation: (1) If a lawsuit is to be filed on
     behalf of the Government against any person on any civil matter, the
     lawsuit has to be filed within the limitation if any specified in this
     Code and other laws on that matter, and if no limitation has been so
     specified, within two years after the date of knowledge to the
     Government of Nepal of the occurrence of the cause of action.

           Provided that if this Code or the other law provides that there is
     no limitation to file a lawsuit and that a lawsuit may be filed any time,
     the lawsuit may be filed any time.

           (2)    For the purposes of sub-section (1), when the concerned
     authority of the Government of Nepal comes to know the matter, the
     Government of Nepal shall be deemed to be in knowledge of the
     matter.

274. Provisions relating to examination of witness or submission of
     evidence: (1) A person who gives information on a case set forth in
     Schedule-30 shall be a witness of the plaintiff side.

           (2)    The concerned authority shall arrange to cause the
     presence or submission of a witness or evidence, on a case set forth in
     Schedule-30 and any other civil case in which the Government of
     Nepal is concerned, through the Government Attorney on the day as
     appointed by the court.



                                     686
             (3)   The Government Attorney shall cause the examination of
     witnesses and submission of evidence on a case set forth in Schedule-
     30 and any other civil case in which the Government of Nepal is
     concerned.

             (4)   If any witness must be examined on a case set forth in
     Schedule-2, the witness may be summoned and examined as if he/she
     were a witness that must be summoned and examined on a criminal
     case.

275. Government Attorney to make pleadings and defense: (1) The
     Government Attorney shall make pleadings and defense on a case set
     forth in Schedule-30 and a civil case that is defined by any law as to
     be a state case.

             (2)   If, except as mentioned in sub-section (1), it is so
     requested by the concerned body in relation to a case in which the
     Government of Nepal is made an opposite party or a civil case which
     has been instituted as the Government of Nepal being a plaintiff, the
     Government Attorney may make pleadings and defense.

276. Time limit to be given: (1) The court shall give a time-limit of
     seventy days for making an appeal on a case set forth in Schedule-30.

             (2)   If the concerned party expires the time limit pursuant to
     sub-section (1) and makes an application showing a reasonable reason
     to the court, the court may extend the time limit of up to thirty days in
     relation the time limit that is extendable pursuant to Chapter-8.

277. Authority to make appeal, revision or review petition: (1) If it is
     required to make an appeal, revision or review petition on a case set


                                    687
     forth in Schedule-30 and on a civil case which is defined by any law
     as the Government of Nepal being plaintiff, the concerned
     Government Attorney shall make such an appeal or petition.

             (2)   If, except that set forth in sub-section (1), it is required to
     make an appeal, revision or review petition or other relevant petition
     on a civil case in which the Government of Nepal is a party or
     opposite party, the concerned authority or chief of office himself or
     herself shall make such an appeal or petition.

             Provided that if the concerned authority or chief of office so
     writes, the concerned Government Attorney may make an appeal,
     revision or review petition or other relevant petition.

278. Procedures for filing lawsuit against the Government of Nepal:
     (1) If it is required to make a lawsuit against the Government of Nepal
     on a civil case, the concerned person shall give a notice thereof to that
     office or the chief of that office against which the lawsuit has to be
     made.

             (2)   If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     concerned office or chief of that office shall have to obtain
     consultation or clearance of another office or body wherever so
     required.

             (3)   If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (1) and
     there is any reason why the lawsuit should not have been made on that
     matter, the concerned office or chief of that office shall give
     information thereof, along with clear reason for the same, to the




                                      688
     concerned person within thirty days after the date of receipt of
     information pursuant to that sub-section.

              (4)   If no information is given within the period as referred to
     in sub-section (1) or the said reason why the lawsuit should not have
     been made is not reasonable, the concerned person may file a lawsuit
     within thirty five days after the date of receipt of such information.

279. Application of Code and law on other matters: This Chapter shall
     apply to the matters set forth in this Chapter, and the other Chapters
     and law shall apply to the other matters not set forth in this Chapter, in
     relation to civil cases in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff or
     party.




                                      689
                               Chapter-24

                              Miscellaneous

280. Compensation to be determined: (1) If, on a case in which
     compensation may be obtained pursuant to law for any loss or damage
     caused to a person by the violation of right or interest of that person,
     that person makes a claim for compensation, the court shall, in
     deciding the case, determine the compensation.

           (2)    In determining the compensation pursuant to sub-section
     (1), the following matters may be taken into consideration except as
     otherwise provided by law for the determination of compensation:

           (a)    Actual loss or damage caused from the violation,

           (b)    Loss in income caused from the violation,

           (c)    Additional loss resulted from the violation.

           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, in determining the compensation, compensation shall be
     determined only on the basis of the actual loss resulted from the
     violation of the right or interest of any person and the actual loss
     resulted or likely to result from that cause, and compensation may not
     be determined on remote matters.

281. Guardian may file case with the leave of court: (1) In making or
     submitting a plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal or
     petition on behalf of a minor who has not attained the age as referred
     to in law, an infirm person due to old age despite attaining the age, a



                                    690
     person who is blind or dumb or a person who is insane, the guardian
     of such a person may, with the leave of the court upon a separate
     petition, along with the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of
     appeal or petition, make or submit the plaint, statement of defense,
     memorandum of appeal or petition.

           (2)    There shall be examined evidence first as to whether a
     person is a minor, a person is inform due to old age despite attaining
     the age, is a blind, dumb or insane or not, pursuant to sub-section (1),
     and if so proved, the guardian may make or submit a plaint, statement
     of defense, memorandum of appeal or petition on behalf of that person
     despite failing a power of attorney or authorization.

           (3)    If a petition is made for a leave pursuant to sub-section
     (1), the court shall examine the petition and make decision on the
     petition on the same day as on which the petition is made for leave.

282. Institution of case on behalf of disappeared person: (1) In making
     or submitting a plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal
     or petition on behalf of a disappeared person, the heir to such a person
     may, with the leave of the court upon a separate petition, along with
     the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal or petition,
     make or submit the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of
     appeal or petition.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
     "disappeared person" means a person who has left the house without
     information since consecutive three years ago or who has gone abroad
     but it is uncertain that he/she will return to Nepal.



                                     691
           (2)    There shall be examined evidence first as to whether a
     person is a disappeared person or not, pursuant to sub-section (1), and
     if so proved, the heir may make or submit a plaint, statement of
     defense, memorandum of appeal or petition on behalf of that person
     despite failing a power of attorney or authorization.

           (3)    If a petition is made for a leave pursuant to sub-section
     (1), the court shall examine the petition and make decision on the
     petition within fifteen days after the making of petition for leave.

           (4)    The provision of limitation shall not apply in the case as
     referred to in sub-section (3).

283. Undertaking to accept case: (1) Where a case is being proceeded
     with any court upon a plaint or memorandum of appeal being filed by
     person, and any party of the case dies or becomes of unsound of mind
     or disappears prior to the judgment on that case and consequently the
     time-limit and due date appointed by the court gets expired, the heir to
     that party may make a petition to the court, undertaking to accept the
     case, for the extension of the time-limit and due date, within twenty
     one days from the date of his/her death, being of unsound mind or
     disappearance, excluding the time required for journey.

           (2)    If, upon examining a petition made pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the contents seem to be reasonable, the court may order to
     allow to undertake to accept the case and to extend the expired time-
     limit or due date.

284. Hearing of cases to be conducted in open bench: (1) The court shall
     conduct hearing of cases in open bench.



                                       692
             (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
      any party of the case makes a petition setting out the reasons for
      conducting in camera the hearing of a case of family relation,
      establishment of relation and divorce, and the request of petition
      seems to be reasonable or if the court itself deems that it is appropriate
      to conduct in camera the hearing of any case, the court shall make an
      order to conduct in camera the hearing of the case.

             (3)   Where an order is made to conduct in camera the hearing
      of a case pursuant to sub-section (2), the court shall prohibit the
      access of any person other than the parties of that case or their
      attorneys, law practitioners appointed by the parties or such other
      persons or employees as the judge considers necessary.

             (4)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if the court considers it reasonable to prevent the access of
      any person for the public security reason, the court may prohibit the
      access of such person to the bench.

285. Requirement to make proceeding in presence of parties: In
      conducting hearing of cases pursuant to Section 271 or deciding issues
      to be settled, such proceeding shall be conducted in presence of the
      parties.

             Provided that even if any party is not present on the due date
      appointed for the hearing of a case, nothing shall be deemed to bar the
      deciding, and reaching the verdict on, the case.

286. Priority order of trying cases: (1) The court shall proceed, hear and
      settle cases as per the following order of priority:



                                      693
            (a)    A case in which a disabled or a minor is a party,

            (b)    A case in which a physically infirm person or aged
                   having attained more than seventy five years of age is a
                   party,

            (c)    A case relating to name-giving function or settlement of
                   relationship,

            (d)    A case relating to alimony,

            (e)    A case relating to divorce,

            (f)    A case registered earlier according to the order of
                   registration of cases.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
      if there are cases of more than one nature in the same order, the case
      registered earlier shall be proceeded, heard and adjudicated first.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
      and (2), the court may, in view of the gravity and propriety of any
      case, proceed, hear and adjudicate such a case by according priority to
      it.

287. Judge not to try case involving conflict of interest: (1) No           judge
      shall, in proceeding, hearing and adjudicating cases pursuant to this
      Code, proceed, hear and adjudicate the following case:

            (a)    A case to or in which his/her right, interest or concern or
                   that of his/her close relative is involved,

                   Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
                   “close relative” means a person who is in the order of


                                      694
             priority to inherit his/her property upon succession, in
             accordance with law, maternal uncle, maternal aunt,
             mother's elder sister, mother's younger sister, father's
             elder brother, father's younger brother, mother-in-law,
             father-in-law on the side of husband or wife, father’s
             sister, father’s sister's husband, elder brother-in-law,
             younger     brother-in-law,    sister-in-law,   elder   sister,
             younger sister, daughter, son-in-law, nephew, niece's
             husband, or any person residing in an undivided family
             of such relative person.

      (b)    A case in which he/she was an attorney, law practitioner
             or witness at any time,

      (c)    A case which was decided by himself or herself as the
             judge in any court or in which he/she made final order,

      (d)    A case in which he/she has given an opinion on whether
             to institute it or not at any time,

      (e)    A case in which he/she or his/her undivided family
             member has a conflict of interest substantially for any
             other reason.

       (2)   If there appears any circumstance as referred to in sub-
section (1), the case hearing judge shall make an order setting out the
reason for not hearing it.

      (3)    If any judge proceeds to try, hear or settle any case in
breach of sub-section (1), any party may make a petition,




                                695
     accompanied by necessary evidence, for not so proceeding, hearing or
     adjudicating the case.

            (4)    If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (3), the
     case trying judge shall, before proceeding, hearing or adjudicating the
     case, ascertain whether the request or claim of such a petition is
     reasonable or not, and make an order to that effect if the judge should
     not hear the case.

            (5)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2) or (4),
     such case shall be proceeded, heard or adjudicated by another judge in
     the same court, and failing such a judge, the case-file, accompanied by
     the reasons therefor, shall be sent to the nearby court of same level to
     proceed, hear and adjudicate the case, and due date shall also be
     appointed for the parties to make presence in that court.

            (6)    If the case-file is received pursuant to sub-section (5),
     such a court shall also proceed, hear and adjudicate such a case
     despite that it is not within its jurisdiction.

288. Acts to be carried out by judge himself or herself:              (1) The
     following acts, out of the acts to be carried out by the court pursuant
     to this Code, shall be carried out by the judge himself or herself:

            (a)    To take and record depositions of parties,

            (b)    To take an oath of witness,

            (c)    To take and record depositions of witnesses,

            (d)    To make interim or interlocutory orders,




                                       696
            (e)    To execute order sheets on matters to be decided in the
                   case,

            (f)    To issue order for the examination of evidence,

            (g)    Preliminary hearing and pre-hearing discussions of cases,

            (h)    To make hearings,

            (i)    To effect compromise,

            (j)    To pass judgments or issue any kind of final order.

             (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
      judge may take assistance of an employee in the court whose rank is
      at least non-gazette first class, as far as available in the court, for the
      purposes of taking or record statements or depositions.

289. Translation of document: (1) If any document written in any
      language other than the Nepali language is submitted to the court in
      the form of evidence, and it appears necessary to translate such a
      document in the Nepali language, the court may order the party who
      has submitted such a document to submit a translation of the
      document in the Nepali language.

            (2)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      concerned party shall get the document translated in the Nepali
      language and submit a certified copy thereof to the court.

290. Assistance of translator: (1) If it is required to take a statement or
      deposition of any party or witness who is unable to understand the
      Nepali language, or for any other purpose, the court may appoint take
      assistance of a translator of the concerned language.



                                      697
           (2)    The concerned party shall bear the expenses incurred in
     taking assistance of the translator for statement or deposition pursuant
     to sub-section (1).

291. Power to ask parties of case at any time: (1) The judge may, prior
     to passing a judgment on a case, order and ask any matter to the
     parties of the case at any time.

           (2)    The responses given pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
     recorded in the case-file.

292. Identity of party or witness may                be kept     secret: (1)
     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, if it
     appears that the disclosure of the identity of any party or witness may
     be prejudicial to the social prestige or honor of such a party or witness
     or may result in undue fear, terror or fright by any party or be
     prejudicial to the security of his/her body or life, the concerned party
     may request the court that the name, surname, address of such a party
     or witness or the name of his/her father or any other description which
     may disclose his/her identity be kept secret.

           (2)    If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
     may issue an order that the name, surname and address of such a party
     or witness and his/her father's name or his/her identity be kept secret.

           (3)    In disclosing the name, surname, address of the person
     or his/her father's name having been kept secret pursuant to sub-
     section (1) at the time of hearing of the concerned case or publishing
     details pertaining thereto, such disclosure shall be made under nick
     name, surname, address or father's name, as per the order of the court.



                                        698
293. Duty to assist in witnessing or signing: (1) Any person required to
     witness an action or sign a document prepared by the court in the
     course of any proceeding pursuant to this Code shall assist the court
     by so witnessing the action or signing the document.

           (2)    If any person refuses to witness a action or sign a
     document as referred to in sub-section (1), the employee executing
     that action or document shall execute such document which shall be
     signed by any other two persons present and by himself or herself,
     setting out that matter and remarks, along with the reason for the
     failure of such a person to witness or sign the concerned document.

           (3)    Any document executed pursuant to sub-section (2) shall
     be deemed to have been executed in fulfillment of the requirements
     specified by law.

           (4)    If any person required to sign any document executed
     before the court refuses to sign it, the judge shall set out the matter,
     mention remarks in the concerned document and sign it.

           (5)    The concerned court may fine a person who causes
     obstruction to or does not cooperate in the action of the court pursuant
     to this Section with a maximum of five thousand rupees.

294. Saving of act done in good faith: No judge or other employee shall
     be subject to any action in relation to any act or action done or taken
     in good faith in accordance with this Code or the rules framed under
     this Code.

295. Not to be invalid by reason of printing or mathematical error: (1)
     Where there is any minor error or omission in respect of the


                                    699
     procedures referred to in this Code while trying, hearing and settling a
     case, or mathematical or any other minor error or omission in writing
     or printing while preparing any document, all acts and proceedings
     relating thereto shall not be deemed invalid merely by that reason.

              (2)   Where there is any mathematical or any other minor error
     or omission in writing or printing while trying, hearing and settling a
     case or while preparing any document pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     judgment may, by executing a separate memorandum, so correct such
     an error or omission that such correction does not affect the verdict.

 296. Receipt to be taken or given: (1) While returning any original
     document registered in the court to any person or handing over any
     original document by the court to any person, a receipt or proof to the
     effect the such document has been so returned or handed over shall be
     executed or taken and enclosed in the case file.

              (2)   While receiving any document submitted by any person
     to the court, it shall give a receipt of the same to that person.

297. Petition fee: Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, there
     shall be charged a fee of ten rupees while making any petition to the
     court.

298. Index of documents: There shall be maintained an index of
     documents in each case in the format specified in Schedule-30, and
     such index shall record the serial number and details of the documents,
     according to the order of the date of registration.




                                      700
299. Disposal of documents: (1) After the completion of five years of the
      final decision on a case, the court shall dispose the documents, except
      the following documents enclosed in the case file of the said case:

            (a)    Plaint,

            (b)    Affidavit,

            (c)    Statement of defense or counter claim,

            (d)    Summons issued in the name of party,

            (e)    Map or design related with the case,

            (f)    Originals of documentary evidence,

            (g)    Deed of compromise,

            (h)    Memorandum of appeal,

            (i)    Petition made for revision or review of verdict,

            (j)    Judgment, decision, final decision made by the court,

            (k)    Any such other documents as considered necessary to be
                   preserved in accordance with law.

            (2)    The employee responsible for documents (Shrestedar)
      shall, prior to the disposal of documents pursuant to sub-section (1)
      prepare an inventory of the documents to be disposed and sign the
      inventory.

300. Power to make alteration in Schedules: The Government of Nepal
      may, by publishing a notification in the Nepal Gazette, make
      necessary alteration in, or addition to, or deletion from, the Schedules.




                                      701
301. Power to frame rules: The Supreme Court may frame necessary
      rules on matters of court proceedings, for the accomplishment of the
      objectives of this Code.

302. Power to remove difficulty: If there arises any difficulty in relation
      to court proceedings in implementing this Code, the full court of the
      Supreme Court may make necessary provision in order to remove
      such a difficulty.

303. Power to frame guidelines: The Supreme Court may, subject to this
      Code and the rules framed under this Code, frame necessary
      guidelines for the accomplishment of the objectives of this Code.




                                    702
                                 Schedule-1

               (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 95)

                               Format of Plaint

                                                  To be filled by Court/Office

                                                        Registration number:

                                                          Date of registration:

                                    Plaint

                      lodged in………..Court/Office

Civil diary number of the year……………

     Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
     ……………., a resident of ………….                                 -Plaintiff

     (If there are two or more Plaintiffs, mention the same details in the
     case of each Plaintiff)

                                      Versus

     ………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
     ……………., a resident of ………….                                 -Defendant

     (If there are two or more Defendants, mention the same details in the
     case of each Defendant)

                                       Case:

1.   I/we Plaintiff make plaint as mentioned in the following paragraphs:

     (a)

     (b)



                                     703
     (c)

     (d)

     (e)

2.   This case is within the jurisdiction of this Court/Office pursuant to
     Section… of ……….

3.   In the case of appointment of law practitioner, details thereof:

     (a)   Name………..                  Certificate number……….

     (b)   Name………..                  Certificate number……….

     (c)   Name………..                  Certificate number……….

4.   I/we have tendered the following fees for payment herewith:

     (a)   Rs………. for…………

     (b)   Rs………. for…………

     (c)   Rs………. for…………

5.   Evidence:

     I/we have attached the copies of the following evidentiary documents
     in this matter:

     (a)

     (b)

     (c)

6.   Witness:

     (a)




                                    704
     (b)

     (c)   …….(Mention full names, ages, and addresses of witnesses)

7.   The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
     false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.

                                            Pliant lodged by:

                                            ………………

Done on ….day of the month of…..of the year……..




                                    705
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Remarks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Signature of employee receiving record
                                                                                                       Civil Diary Book from the month of Shrwan of the year…..to the last day of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        case file
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Type of judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Date of judgment and name of judge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        passing judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Date on which statement of defense
             (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 98)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        submitted or time limit has expired
                                                                                                                                                                                    the month of Ashad of the year…….




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure of amount in question
                                                                                  …………..Court/Office
                                                           Format of Diary Book




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Name and signature of section chief
Schedule-2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Case




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    706
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Defendant's     name,   surname       and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        address
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plaintiff's name, surname and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        address
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plaintiff's signature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Date of registration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Case number
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SN
                                   Schedule-3

(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 98, sub-section (1) of Section 122,
                         and sub-section (2) of Section 124)

                                    Receipt

                           …………..Court/Office



Whereas,    plaint/    statement   of    defense/   memorandum       of   appeal
lodged/submitted by…………….., has been received by this Court/Office
and registered in the Diary Book of this Court/Office, with registration
number….on ………(date);

Now, therefore, this receipt is hereby given.

   Employee registering plaint/statement of defense/memorandum of appeal:

                                                        Signature:

                                                               Name:

                                                               Post:

                                                               Date:

Seal of Court/Office




                                        707
                                Schedule-4

                (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 99)

    Receipt of Acknowledgement of Plaint along with the summons

Whereas, …………………. has lodged the Plaint in …………Court/Office
on……….(date), and has been tendered by him/her to me for the purpose of
submitting a statement of defense;

Now, therefore, I have acknowledged the receipt of the copies of the Plaint
and evidence, along with the summons.

           Person acknowledging receipt of Plaint along with the summons:

                                                      Signature:

                                                              Name:

                                                              Date:

                                                              Time:




                                     708
                                  Schedule-5

       (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 104 and Section 114)

                    Summons Issued by …….Office/Office

                          in the Name of Defendant

Whereas, Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/ daughter/ husband/
wife of ……………., a resident of ………… Gown, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District, has lodged a Plaint of
………..case against you Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/
daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of ………… Gown,
Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, in this Office/Court on …..date;

Now, therefore, a copy of the Plaint is also hereby herewith forwarded. You
are hereby informed to appear in person or send an attorney or law
practitioner in accordance with law, accompanied by a Statement of Defense
and your documentary evidence in accordance with law within twenty one
days excluding the time limit required for journey after the date of receipt of
this summons by you or the date of affixation of this summons at your house
according to law.

If you fail to appear in person or through an attorney or law practitioner,
accompanied by the Statement of Defense within the time-limit, the case
shall be adjudicated according to law, and any of your complaints on this
matte shall not be entertained in the future.

                                                  Summons issuing authority:

                                                        Signature:

                                                              Name:



                                       709
                                                            Post:

                                                           Date:

                                                           Time:

                                     Date of service:

(a)   In cases where the summons is received by the person required to
      receive:

      I hereby sign covenanting that I have myself received a copy of the
      summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint, issued in my name as
      mentioned herein in presence of the following witnesses: …………

(b)   In cases where the summons is received by a member of the joint
      family of the person required to receive:

      As the person named in the summons as mentioned herein has refused
      to receive the summons/ has not been found, I………, age
      of………year, who is………..by relation of ………………..the
      person who is named in the summons, hereby sign covenanting that I
      have received a copy of the summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint,
      issued in his/her name as mentioned herein, in presence of the
      following witnesses: …………

(c)   In cases where the summons is affixed at the house of the person
      required to receive:

      We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
      named in the summons as mentioned herein as well as any major
      member of his/her joint family has refused to receive the
      summons/has not been found, a copy of the summons, as well as a



                                    710
      copy of the Plaint, issued in his/her name, has been affixed at his/her
      house in a manner conspicuously to all in presence of us, the
      following witnesses, and it is true that a copy of the summons has
      been     delivered    to    the         Office   of   Ward   No….   of
      …….VDC/Municipality.

(d)   In cases where the summons is to be served when the person
      required to receive it is not found:

      We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
      required to receive the summons as mentioned herein or his/her house
      as well has been searched but not found, a copy of the summons
      issued in his/her name has been affixed at….. of the concerned Ward
      or at public place…… (set out the place) of street…., and the copy of
      the Plaint and the served summons have been sent back….

                                        Witnesses

      We hereby sign covenanting that it is true that the summons has been
      served in our presence in accordance with the above-mentioned clause.

      1.     Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
             village,      Ward         No…..,         ………VDC/Municipality,
             ……….District.

      2.     Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
             village,      Ward         No…..,         ………VDC/Municipality,
             ……….District.




                                        711
3.      Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
        village,        Ward      No…..,        ………VDC/Municipality,
        ……….District.

                                In presence:

Mr./Mrs.           …………….,              member/secretary………..             of
…………VDC/Municipality,……………. District

     In cases where affixed at house or village city or street is not
                                   found

Employee or office-bearer who signs covenanting that one copy of the
summons as mentioned herein has been tendered for affixing at the
notice-board       of    the   Office   of     Ward   No……       of      this
………….VDC/Municipality:

                                           (Employee or office-bearer)

Process server:

Process server's name, surname:

Signature:

Date:




                                  712
                                 Schedule-6

                (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 104)

                  Summons Issued by …….Office/Office

                 in the Name of Person Except Defendant

Whereas, it is necessary to inquire you, Mr./Ms………….., age of …….
years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of …………
village, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, ………….District, into
some matters in connection with the case of ………, between the
plaintiff……… and the defendant………..;

Now, therefore, you are hereby informed to appear in person in this
Office/Court or send an attorney or law practitioner appointed in accordance
with law within seven days excluding the time limit required for journey
after the date of receipt of this summons by you or the date of affixation of
this summons at your house according to law.

If you fail to appear in person or through an attorney or law practitioner
within the time-limit, the case shall be adjudicated according to law, and any
of your complaints on this matter shall not be entertained in the future.

                                                  Summons issuing authority:

                                                         Signature:

                                                               Name:

                                                               Post:

                                                               Date:

                                                               Time:



                                      713
                                      Date of service:

(a)   In cases where the summons is received by the person required to
      receive:

      I hereby sign covenanting that I have myself received a copy of the
      summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint, issued in my name as
      mentioned herein in presence of the following witnesses: …………

(b)   In cases where the summons is received by a member of the joint
      family of the person required to receive:

      As the person named in the summons as mentioned herein has refused
      to receive the summons/ has not been found, I………, age
      of………year, who is………..by relation of ………………..the
      person who is named in the summons, hereby sign covenanting that I
      have received a copy of the summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint,
      issued in his/her name as mentioned herein, in presence of the
      following witnesses: …………

(c)   In cases where the summons is affixed at the house of the person
      required to receive:

      We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
      named in the summons as mentioned herein as well as any major
      member of his/her joint family has refused to receive the
      summons/has not been found, a copy of the summons, as well as a
      copy of the Plaint, issued in his/her name, has been affixed at his/her
      house in a manner conspicuously to all in presence of us, the
      following witnesses, and it is true that a copy of the summons has




                                    714
      been     delivered    to    the         Office   of   Ward   No….   of
      …….VDC/Municipality.

(d)   In cases where the summons is to be served when the person
      required to receive it is not found:

      We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
      required to receive the summons as mentioned herein or his/her house
      as well has been searched but not found, a copy of the summons
      issued in his/her name has been affixed at….. of the concerned Ward
      or at public place…… (set out the place) of street…., and the copy of
      the Plaint and the served summons have been sent back….

                                        Witnesses

      We hereby sign covenanting that it is true that the summons has been
      served in our presence in accordance with the above-mentioned clause.

      1.     Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
             village,      Ward         No…..,         ………VDC/Municipality,
             ……….District.

      2.     Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
             village,      Ward         No…..,         ………VDC/Municipality,
             ……….District.

      3.     Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
             village,      Ward         No…..,         ………VDC/Municipality,
             ……….District.

                                   In presence:




                                        715
Mr./Mrs.          …………….,             member/secretary………..             of
…………VDC/Municipality,……………. District

   In cases where affixed at house or village city or street is not
                                 found

Employee or office-bearer who signs covenanting that one copy of the
summons as mentioned herein has been tendered for affixing at the
notice-board      of   the   Office   of    Ward    No……       of      this
………….VDC/Municipality:

                                         (Employee or office-bearer)

Process server:

Process server's name, surname:

Signature:

Date:




                                716
                                  Schedule-7

               (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 113)

 Receipt Given by Attorney or Law Practitioner upon Receiving Plaint
                    Accompanied by the Summons/Summons

I have received the Plaint accompanied by the summons and a copy of
evidence/summons tendered by Mr./Ms………………, who has lodged the
Plaint in this Office/Court on……..(date), for the purpose of submitting a
State of Defense.

                    Attorney     or   law   practitioner   receiving   plaint
                    accompanied by the summons/summons:

                         Signature:

                         Name, surname:

                         Address:

                         Date:

                         Time:

                         Certificate number of attorney/law practitioner:




                                      717
                                 Schedule-8

                          (Relating to Section 120)

                      Format of Statement of Defense

                                                 To be filled by Court/Office

                                                         Registration number:

                                                          Date of registration:

                    Statement of Defense Submitted to

                            ………..Court/Office

                 Civil diary number of the year……………

      Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
      ……………., a resident of ………….                                -Defendant

      (If there are two or more Defendants, mention the same details in the
      case of each Defendant)

                                      Versus

      ………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
      ……………., a resident of ………….                                -Plaintiff

      (If there are two or more Plaintiffs, mention the same details in the
      case of each Plaintiff)

                                        Case:

Whereas, in the above-mentioned case, the summons accompanied by the
Plaint has been served on…….. (date);




                                     718
I/we have appeared along with the Statement of Defense within the time-
limit, in relation to the matters claimed by the Pliant in various paragraphs of
his/her Plaint.

1.    I/we have set out the following paragraphs my/our true statements in
      relation to the matters claimed by the Plaintiff:

      (a)

      (b)

      (c)

      (d)

      (e)

2.    I/we admit the claims of Plaint fully or partly/do not admit the same at
      all.

3.    Mention counter claims if any:

      (a)

      (b)

      (c)

4.    In the case of appointment of law practitioner, details thereof:

      (a)    Name………..                 Certificate number……….

      (b)    Name………..                 Certificate number……….

      (c)    Name………..                 Certificate number……….

5.    I/we have tendered the following fees for payment herewith:

      (a)    Rs………. for…………



                                      719
     (b)   Rs………. for…………

6.   Evidence:

     I/we have attached the copies of the following evidentiary documents
     in this matter:

     (a)

     (b)

     (c)

6.   Witness:

     (a)

     (b)

     (c)   …….(Mention full names, ages, and addresses of witnesses)

7.   For such and such reasons, this matter is or is not liable to preliminary
     hearing pursuant to Section 131 of the Civil Procedure Code, 2067
     (2011).

8.   The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
     false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.

                                      Statement of Defense submitted by:

                                            ………………

Done on ….day of the month of…..of the year……..




                                    720
                            Schedule-9

         (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 137)

                Format of Book of Due Date

      Book of Due Date maintained in………Court/Office

Year:………………..

Month,   SN   Case   Name               of Name       of Purpose of Remarks
Day                  appellant/           respondent/ appointment
                     plaintiff/petitioner plaintiff      of due date




                                                                       Signature:




                                  721
                                  Schedule-9
                (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 137)
                   Format of Memorandum of Due Date

Memorandum of due date issued by...............in the name of................

                    …………………Versus.....................
Whereas, the date of ........, has been appointed as the due date for presence
for the purpose of ................, in the case of……………, civil diary number
………….. of the year…….;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to make presence at........o'clock on
the said day.
                                   Signature of employee appointing due date:
                                        Date:




                                       722
                                     Schedule-11
                  (Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 138)
                           Format of Receipt of Due Date

                      Receipt of Due Date Maintained in……..Office/Court
              Plaintiff                        Defendant
              Case:
              On……….(date)
Whereas, the case is scheduled to be heard finally for judgment or
…………..business is to be conducted on………..(date);
Now, therefore, I hereby sign covenanting that I shall make presence
at........o'clock on the said day.
              Plaintiff:                            Defendant:




                                         723
                                          Schedule-12
                     (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 151)
                                 Format of Power of Attorney
I   have,      by     this       power    of        attorney,   appointed      and     authorized
Mr./Ms.......................,      age        of         ……years,      holding       citizenship
number…..( year and district of issue of citizenship certificate), a resident of
……………., as my attorney to carry out the act of..................... (set out the
purpose) on my behalf, in the case of.......... with................ He/she does not
suffer any disqualification for being an attorney, in accordance with law.
Any such penalty, fine, court fees, government amount in question or other
fees as imposed on me by the court pursuant to law is not due and payable
by me. The contents mentioned above are true and correct. I consent that this
power of attorney may be annulled pursuant to law if the contents mentioned
above are proved to be false.
Date:
Thumb impressions                                                                    Signature:
Right            Left                                                ...........(Full name)
                                                                     ...........(Full address)
I hereby consent to act as an attorney of Mr./Ms..............., age of …… years,
holding citizenship number….. (year and district of issue of citizenship
certificate), a resident of..............., as mentioned above. I shall perform the
said act with honesty. Any such penalty, fine, court fees, government
amount in question or other fees as imposed on me by the court pursuant to
law is not due and payable by me. I do not suffer any disqualification for
being an attorney, in accordance with law.
Date:



                                                    724
Thumb impressions                                                  Signature:
Right         Left                                  ...........(Full name)
                                                    ...........(Full address)
Witnesses:
It is true and correct that this power of attorney has been drawn up and
signed in our presence.
        (1)   ………………………….age of ......years, a resident of..................

        (2)   ………………………….age of ......years, a resident of..................

        (3)   Writer:…………
This Power of Attorney has been drawn up at………….
Date:




                                      725
                                       Schedule-13
                   (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 185)
             Format of Summons Issued in the Name of Witness

Summons issued by............ Office/Court in the name of................a resident
                                         of............

Whereas, you have been mentioned as a witness by …………….. in the case
of..........., in which..................is plaintiff and ..............is defendant, and it is
required to inquire you into some matters and take your deposition;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear in this Office/Court
at.......o'clock in the morning on the------day of the month of..........the
year........ If you fail to appear, it shall be in accordance with the laws.
                                        Signature of summons issuing authority:
                                                Signature:
                                                Name:
                                                Post:
                                                Date:
(Seal of the Office/Court)




                                              726
                                 Schedule-14
                (Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 186)
 Format of Deed of Records of Examination of Witness through Video
                           Conferencing


It is true and correct that since Mr./Ms.…………., a resident of………, who
is a witness of the plaintiff/defendant, in the case…………….., in which
……..is plaintiff and ………….defendant , could not appear in the court,
that witness has been examined through video conferencing by an order
dated……….. The witness was examined in presence of us, the following
persons.


Name, surname of the witness:


Signature of employee deputed by the court:
Name, surname and post of employee deputed by the court:


Signature of plaintiff, defendant or their attorney or law practitioner:
Name and surname of plaintiff, defendant or their attorney or law
practitioner:


Signature of member or representative of local body:
Name, surname and post of member or representative of local body:




                                       727
                                     Schedule-15
                             (Relating to Section 189)
                    Form of Oath To be Taken by Witness


I............hereby take an oath in the name of the God/ swear with truth and
honesty that in the case of...............versus............, I shall give true statement
of whatever I have seen, known and heard; that I shall not conceal or lie any
matter; and that I shall give true answers to all questions asked by the
Office/Court and by or on behalf of the parties to the case, to the extent of
whatever I have seen, known and heard. If the matters are proved false, I
shall be liable to the consequences as per law.
                                                Signature of oath taking person:
                                            Date:


It is true and correct that the witness has taken oath in my presence.
(Signature of the judge)


Date:




                                          728
                                    Schedule-16
                 (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 192)
                  Format of Taking Deposition of Witness
                                   Case................
                 Civil Diary Number............of the year.........
                 ………………………..Versus.....................
                        Deposition of witness...................


                  Questions and answers of the questions
 1.    Question (to be asked by the court): What is your and your father's,
                                      mother's name?
                                       Answer:
           What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
                                       Answer:
2.    Question (to be asked by the concerned party/his/her law practitioner):
                  (a)                              Answer:……….
                  (b)                              Answer:……….
                  (c)                              Answer:……….
                  (d)                              Answer:……….
      (Note: If the concerned party or law practitioner does not ask any
      question, the court shall ask necessary questions)
      3.      If the opposite party/law practitioner has made cross-
              examination, details thereof:…..
                  (a)                              Answer:……….
                  (b)                              Answer:……….
                  (c)                              Answer:……….



                                           729
            (d)                        Answer:……….
4.      If the concerned party party/law practitioner desires to make re-
        examination, details thereof:…..
            (a)                        Answer:……….
            (b)                        Answer:……….
            (c)                        Answer:……….
            (d)                        Answer:……….
5.      If the court desires to ask any question, details thereof:…..
            (a)                        Answer:……….
            (b)                        Answer:……….
6.      It is true and correct that this deposition records what I have
        stated.
Signature of the party:
Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the person/judge taking deposition:
Date:




                                 730
                              Schedule-17
               (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 194)
                Form of Commission/Letter of Rogetory

               A commission/letter rogetory sent by...............
                         Case number .............
                             Of the year.....
                                   Case
                ……………………………………..Plaintiff
                                 Versus
               ……………………………………..Defendant

                       Deposition of witness...............

1.   Question: What is your and your father's name?
     Answer:
     What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
     Answer:
2.   Questions asked and sent by the court:
     (a)   Question:                     Answer:……….
     (b)   Question:                     Answer:……….
     (c)   Question:                     Answer:……….
     (d)   Question:                            Answer:……….
     (e)   Question:                            Answer:……..
3.   If the opposite party/law practitioner has appeared and made cross-
     examination, details thereof:…..
     (a)                         Answer:……….
     (b)                         Answer:……….
     (c)                         Answer:……….
4.   It is true and correct that this deposition by commission records what I
     have stated.


                                       731
Signature of the party:
Signature of the person making deposition by commission:
Signature of the person or judge taking deposition by commission:
Date:




                              732
                                     Schedule-18
                 (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 203)
                                     ...........Court
                                Form of Judgment
                            …….District Court/Office
                                         Bench
                             Judgment passed by…….
             Civil Diary Number...............of the year....................
                                         Case:
 Name, surname and address of the                Name, surname and address of the
                Plaintiff                                      Defendant
 (If there are two or more Plaintiffs,        (If there are two or more Defendants,
mention the same details in the case             mention the same details in the case
           of each Plaintiff)                              of each Defendant)




       Plaintiff's witness……..                          Defendant's witness……..
              Evidence:                                        Evidence:


                                  Examined by the court:
                                    Witness:…………..
                                    Evidence:…………
                                          ………….
Brief facts of the case:
Matters to be decided by the court:



                                           733
Verdict of the court, accompanied by the reasons:


Other necessary matters:
(Note: On the basis of the plaint lodged, statement of defense submitted in
rebuttal of the plaint, counterclaims, evidences furnished by the plaintiff or
the defendant in the concerned case, and the relevant laws, the judge shall
have to set down his/her verdict specifying the reasons why the claims of the
plaint or counterclaims sustain or not.)
1.    Matter relating to the execution of judgment:
2.    Matter relating to time-limit for appeal:
3.    Matter relating to court fees:
4.    Other necessary matters:
      (Note: In the matters to be mentioned in the subsequent part of the
      judgment, the judgment passing judge shall mention how the
      judgment is executed, whether it is appealable or not and if appealable,
      in which court it is appealable, whether court fees, charges are to be
      recovered or not, and if so recovered, how they are to be recovered
      and other necessary matters depending on the nature of the case).
                           The judge has to put his/her full signature here,
                           along with the date


Name of the employee assisting in the preparation of the judgment:
Done on ……, the……day of the month of…………..of the year……..




                                       734
                                Schedule-19
                (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 205)
Format of Notice of Appeal Time Limit along with Judgment/ Notice of
                                 Judgment


The notice of appeal time limit along with judgment/notice of judgment
issued by ……………Court/Office in the name of ………………, a resident
of……………………………….


Whereas, in the case of…………, in which …………..is plaintiff and
…………….is defendant, judgment has been passed by this Court/Office
on……………., sustaining the plaintiff claim/dismissing the plaintiff
claim/withholding the plaintiff claim;
Now, therefore, if you are not satisfied with the judgment, you are hereby
informed to make an appeal in the Appellate Court within…..days from the
date of receipt of this time-limit or of the affixation of the notice of time-
limit at your house. If you fail to make an appeal within the time limit and
expire the time limit, the case shall be dealt with in accordance with law.
Any of your subsequent claims shall not be entertained. This notice is hereby
sent for your information.
Signature of authority issuing the notice of appeal time limit/judgment:
                                Signature:
                                Name:
                                Post:
                                Date:




                                        735
                                   Schedule-20

                 (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 213)

                     Format of Memorandum of Appeal

                                                  To be filled by Court/Office

                                                          Registration number:

                                                           Date of registration:

                           Memorandum of Appeal

                         filed in………..Court/Office

        ………………, a resident of……… Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant

        (If there are two or more Appellants, mention the same details in the
        case of each Appellant)

                                     Versus

………………, a resident of……… Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant

        (If there are two or more Respondents, mention the same details in the
        case of each Respondent)

Case:

The judge and Court/Office passing judgment:

Date of judgment:

Case file number of judgment:

Whereas, I/ we am/are not satisfied with the judgment passed by the said
judge and the court/office in the above-mentioned case in which I/ we
am/are party, thereby holding the following matters in relation to the



                                       736
following matters, and I/ we have got the notice of the judgment
on….(mention the date);

Now, therefore, I/ we hereby make the following appeal, pursuant to
Section…..of the Civil Code, 2067 (2010).

1.    Short description of the case:

2.    Grounds on which the judgment is based:

3.    Reasons for making appeal and matters of rebuttal of the grounds on
      which the judgment is based:

      (a)

      (b)

      (c)

4.    Appeal pleas:

5.    Court fees and other fees chargeable in making appeal:

6.    Other necessary matters, if any:

      (a)

      (b)

      (c)

7.    The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
      false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.

                                             Appellant's signature:

                                             Date:




                                       737
                                 Schedule-21

                  (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 219)

    Format of Notice Issued to Summon the Presence of Respondent

                              …….Office/Office

      ……………………………………                           Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant

                                    Versus

      …………………………..………                          Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant

Notice issued in the name of Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/
daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of …………
village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.

Whereas, an order (mention the short description of the order) was issued by
this Court on……….(date);

Now, therefore, this notice, accompanied by a copy of the order, is hereby
sent to you for your information. You are hereby informed to appear in
person or send an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with law,
accompanied by your documentary evidence in that case. Otherwise, the
matter shall be proceeded with in accordance with law. The case may be
matured for decision after fifteen days of the service of this notice.

On this…………..day, ….of the month of ………of the year………, this
notice is issued under the seal of the court and with my signature.

(Seal of court)                                As ordered,

                                               Signature




                                       738
                                   Schedule-22
                (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 220)
                        Form of Appellate Judgment
                                   ...........Court
                            (Single/Division Bench)
                 Judgment passed by Honorable Judge…….
           Civil Appeal Number...............of the year....................
                                    Case:……..
Full name, surname and address of the Appellant
                                                      Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Appellants, mention the same details in the case of
                                 each Appellant)
                                         Vs
Full name, surname and address of the Respondent
                                                      Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant
 (If there are two or more Respondents, mention the same details in the case
                               of each Respondent)


1.    Brief facts of the case:
      (Mention brief facts of the case and matters in which appeal has been
      made)
2.    Mention short description of the order made by the Appellate Court to
      summon the presence of the Respondent:
3.    Mention short description of the evidence, if any, examined:
4.    Appeal claims and matters to be decided by the Appellate Court
      (mention in points)



                                         739
      (a)
(b)   Decision and verdict of the Court, accompanied by the reasons and
      grounds:
Subsequent section:
1.    Matter relating to the execution of judgment:
2.    Matter relating to time-limit for appeal:
3.    Matter relating to court fees:
4.    Other necessary matters:
      (Note: In the matters to be mentioned in the subsequent part of the
      judgment, the judgment passing judge shall mention how the
      judgment is executed, whether it is appealable or not and if appealable,
      in which court it is appealable, whether court fees, charges are to be
      recovered or not, and if so recovered, how they are to be recovered
      and other necessary matters depending on the nature of the case).
                          The judge has to put his/her full signature here,
                          along with the date


Name of the employee assisting in the preparation of the judgment:
Done on ……, the……day of the month of…………..of the year……..




                                       740
                                 Schedule-23
                (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 228)
         Format of Request for the Service of Judicial Document
1.    Name and address of the foreign court making order to serve the
      judicial document in Nepal:

2.    Description of the case:

3.    Description of the judicial document to be served:

4.   The name, surname, address of, and other necessary details to identify,
      the person on whom the judicial has to be served:

      (a)
      (b)
      (c)
      (d)
5.    Description of which procedure or mode has to be adopted for the
      service of the judicial document:

6.    Description of the body making request for the service of the judicial
      document:

                                      Concerned authority:

                                      Signature:

                                      Name, surname:

                                      Office:

                                      Date:

The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.


                                     741
                                 Schedule-24
                 (Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 229)
       Format of Description of the Service of Judicial Document
The undersigned has certified that the following judicial document has been
served as follows or that it has not been served:

1.    Country making request for the service of the judicial document and
      authority of such a country:

2.    Description of the judicial document served:

3.    Date of receipt of the judicial document to be served:

4.    Case:

5.    The name, surname and address of the person on whom the judicial to
      be served or has been served:

      (a)
      (b)
      (c)
      (d)
6.    Description of whom the judicial document has been delivered to and
      served:

      (a)     Full name:

      (b)     Address:

      (c)     His/her relation with the person whom the judicial document to
              be served or has been served:

7.    Where the service has been executed in any manner other than that set
      forth in paragraph 6, description thereof:



                                      742
8.    Whether service has been executed in accordance with the laws of
      Nepal or in accordance with separate mode pursuant to the request of
      the concerned country:

9.    In the event of failure to execute the service, description thereof:

10.   In the event of failure to execute the service, description of the return
      of the judicial document:

                                       Certifying authority:

                                       Name, surname:

                                       Office:

                                       Signature:

                                       Date:

The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.




                                      743
                                Schedule-25
               (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 230)
        Format of Details of Evidence To Be Examined Abroad
1.   Name and address of the court/office making order to examine the
     evidence abroad:

2.   Description of the case:

3.   Date of filing of case:

4.   Plaintiff……………                  Defendant…………

5.   Description of the evidence to be taken:

6.   The name, surname, address of, and other necessary details to identify,
     the person from whom evidence has to be taken:

     (a)
     (b)
     (c)
     (d)
7.   Procedures and manner of examination of the evidence:

8.   Description of the body making request for the taking of evidence:

                                     Concerned authority:

                                     Signature:

                                     Name, surname:

                                     Office:

                                     Date:




                                    744
The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.

                                 Schedule-26

                  (Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 249)

 Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Presence of Party For the
                         Purpose of Execution of Judgment

Twenty-one Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name
of Mr./Ms………….., son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a
resident of ………… village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality,
………….District.



      Whereas, final judgment (mention short details what has been
adjudicated) was passed by the………… Court on……….(date), in the case
of………in which …………is plaintiff and ………………is defendant;

Now, therefore, this summons has been issued to summon your presence for
the purpose of execution of the judgment. You are hereby informed to
appear in person or send an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with
law, within twenty one days, excluding the time limit required for journey,
after the date of receipt by you of this summons or that of affixation of the
summons upon fulfillment of the legal requirements. The matter shall be
proceeded with in accordance with law if you do not make presence within
the time limit.

                                              (Signature)

                                              (Full name, surname)



                                      745
                                                    Bailiff

Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………

                                Schedule-27

                (Relating to sub-section (9) of Section 252)

Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Person to Open the Lock of
                          House/Shop to be Foreclosed

Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms………….., son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident
of ………… village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality,
………….District.

Whereas, final judgment (mention short details what has been adjudicated)
was passed by the………… Court on……….(date) to make foreclosure, in
the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and ………………is
defendant, and whereas, a mission was sent by his Court to make foreclosure,
by the mission found that the house/shop, built in plot number….., situated
at Ward No….., ………..VDC/Municipality,…………District, was locked
up and you, who are the owner of that house/shop did not appear to open
that lock;

Now, therefore, this fifteen-day summons has been affixed at the house/shop
to be foreclosed, hereby requiring you to open the lock of that house/shop.
You are hereby required to open the lock of that house/shop within fifteen
days after the affixation of this summons. If you do not open the lock within
that time limit, the mission sent by the court shall effect the foreclosure of




                                     746
the house or shop by breaking the lock. Any complaint by you in this regard
shall not be entertained in the future.

                                                   (Signature)

Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………

                                  Schedule-28

                 (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 255)

 Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Coparcener Who Does not
                    Appear For Setting Aside Partition Share

Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms…………..,          age of …..years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of
……………., a resident of ………… village/street, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.

Whereas, final judgment was passed by the………… Court on……….(date)
to execute partition, in the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and
………………is defendant, and whereas, the other coparceners appeared in
the Court for the setting aside of partition shares in accordance with law in
pursuance of the judgment but you were absent;

Now, therefore, this summons is hereby issued requiring you to make
presence to receive your share in partition in accordance with law. You are
hereby required to appear in person or send an attorney or law practitioner in
accordance with law, within fifteen days, excluding the time limit required
for journey, after the date of receipt by you of this summons or that of
affixation of the summons upon fulfillment of the legal requirements. If you
make presence, the partition shall be effected by setting aside the partition



                                          747
shares of all coparceners including you at the same time. But if you fail to
make presence, you shall not be entitled to make a complaint in the future
that the partition was executed in your absence and executed partition was
not proportionate or was unjust. The matter shall be proceeded with in
accordance with law if you do not make presence in the court within the
time limit.

                                                  (Signature)

Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………




                                    748
                                 Schedule-29

                (Relating to sub-section (8) of Section 255)

Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Coparcener Who Is To Give

 Partition Share or Who Takes Custody of Property To Be Partitioned

Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms…………..,          age of …..years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of
……………., a resident of ………… village/street, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.

Whereas, final judgment was passed by the………… Court on……….(date)
to execute partition, in the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and
………………is defendant, and whereas, a commission was sent by the
court to execute partition in pursuance of the judgment but you were not
found and any major person in your undivided family did not produce all
properties as set forth in the inventory of property;

Now, therefore, this summons is hereby affixed at your house. You are
hereby required to appear in person in the court or send an attorney or law
practitioner in accordance with law, within fifteen days, excluding the time
limit required for journey, after the date of affixation of the summons, in
order to show and set aside all properties that are to be partitioned and in
your custody, as set forth in the inventory of properties, and effect partition
accordingly. If you fail to make presence in person or send your attorney or
law practitioner, the matter shall be proceeded with in accordance with law.

                                                        (Signature)

Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………



                                       749
                               Schedule-30
                        (Relating to Section 268)
              Civil cases in which Government is plaintiff
1.   Case involving the right, interest or concern of the Government of
     Nepal or any office thereof, court, constitutional body
2.   Case relating to concealment of governmental land
3.   Case relating to concealment of land tax or tariff
4.   Case under Sections 460 and 461 of Chapter-11 of this Code
5.   Case involving the issue of concealment of governmental money or
     asset or case involving the matter of determination of governmental
     locus standi
6.   Such other civil case as may be specified to be one in which the
     Government of Nepal is plaintiff, pursuant to this Code, by the
     Government of Nepal from time to time by publishing a notice in the
     Nepal Gazette.




                                    750
                                             Schedule-31
                                   (Relating to Section 285)
                             Format of Index of Documents


          .............................................versus.......................................
Case:
Case file number.........of year........
Serial           Short description of               Name of               Date of               Signature
number of        documents                          parties               submission            of
documents                                           submitting            of                    employee
                                                    documents             documents
                 Never to          To be
                 be                disposed
                 disposed          after five
                                   years



Signature of preparer:                                          Signature of certifying officer:




                                                    751