                                                                         (Revised)

             The National Criminal Procedure (Code) Act, 2017
                                                          Date of Authentication:

                                                                 16 October 2017

                           Act Number 37 of the year 2017

            An Act Made To Amend And Consolidate Laws Relating to
                            Procedures of Criminal Cases

     Preamble:

             Whereas, it is expedient to make the procedural law simplified and
     timely, by amending and consolidating the laws in force relating to
     procedures on investigation, prosecution, filing, proceeding, hearing and
     adjudication of criminal cases and other procedures related thereto, and
     execution of judgments on such cases;

             Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament referred to in clause (1)
     of Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act.

                                      Chapter-1

                                     Preliminary

1.        Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
          "National Criminal Procedure (Code) Act, 2017".

             (2)   Section 192 of this Act shall commence on such date as
          appointed by the Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal
          Gazette, and the other Sections, on 17 August 2018.

     2.      Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
             this Code,-



                                                                                 1
(a)   "court" means the Supreme Court, High Court or District
      Court, and this term also includes any other court, judicial
      body or authority empowered by law to proceed, hear and
      adjudicate any specific type of criminal cases;

(b)   "investigating authority" means an authority designated under
      this Act or competent authority under law to make
      investigation into any offence, and this term also includes an
      investigation team formed to investigate into any specific
      offence;

(c)   "Penal Code" means the National Penal (Code) Act, 2017;

(d)   "complaint" means a plaint to be filed in a court, and this term
      also includes a charge-sheet in relation to any offence under
      Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, and a report thereon in relation to
      any other case;

(e)   "offence" means an act punishable by the Penal Code or other
      Act;

(f)   "law" means a law for the time being in force;

(g)   "grave offence" means any offence punishable by a sentence
      of imprisonment for a term of more than three and less than
      ten years;

(h)   "heinous offence" means any offence punishable by a sentence
      of imprisonment for life or for a term of more than ten years,

(i)   "place" means a house, shed, cow shed, elephant shed or tent,
      and this term also includes a motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft,
      and other place or means of similar nature;




                                                                       2
(j)   "judge" means the authority of a court to proceed, hear and
      adjudicate a case, and this term also includes an authority
      competent to proceed, hear and adjudicate a criminal case;

(k)   "police office" means a police office authorized to investigate
      into any offence set forth in Schedule-1;

(l)   "criminal case" means a case related to an offence under
      Schedule-1, Schedule-2, Schedule-3 or Schedule-4, and this
      term also includes any other case, except a case on any of the
      following matters:

            (1)    A case related to a legal right, status, post, family
                   relationship or property,

            (2)    Establishment of relationship, or divorce,

            (3)    Fee, remuneration, salary, allowance or wage,

            (4)    Partition,   succession,    donation,    gift,   will,
                   guardianship, curatorship, parental authority,
                   adoption,

            (5)    Any right or claim under any contract, quasi-
                   contract or unlawful enrichment,

            (6)    Any right or claim relating to tort, quasi-tort or
                   defective product,

            (7)    Servitude,

            (8)    Compensation, or

            (9)    Any other right or liability of civil nature.

(m)   "case" means a criminal case;




                                                                       3
     (n)   "adjudicating authority" means an authority empowered by
           law to proceed, hear and adjudicate a case, and this term also
           includes, in the case of a person taken in custody, a court
           nearby the place where the person is taken in custody;

     (o)   "Local Level" means a Village Body (Gownpalika) or
           Municipality;

     (p)   "government attorney" means the Attorney General, Deputy
           Attorney General, Joint Attorney, Deputy Attorney, District
           Attorney or Assistant District Attorney, and this term also
           includes an officer designated by the Attorney General to act
           in the capacity of government attorney.

3.   Special legal provisions, if any, made not to be affected: (1) If a
     separate Act provides for special provisions on the prosecution,
     investigation, trial, hearing, execution of judgments or any other
     proceeding of, or jurisdiction to try cases on, any specific offence,
     such matters shall be governed by such Act and shall not be affected
     by any provision contained in this Act.

           (2)      This Act shall govern the matters of procedures on
     which special legal provisions have not been made pursuant to sub-
     section (1).




                                                                        4
                                Chapter-2

     Provisions Relating to Information on Commission of, and
                       Investigation into, Offences

4.   First information report or information on commission of
     offence to be given: (1) A person who knows that any offence set
     forth in Schedule-1 has been committed or is being committed or is
     likely to be committed shall, as soon as possible, make a first
     information report in writing or give information on such offence,
     verbally or through electronic means, along with whatever proof or
     evidence which is in his or her possession or which he or she has
     seen or known, to the nearby police office in the form referred to in
     Schedule-5.

           (2)     If a person making a first information report or giving
     information referred to in sub-section (1) does not give such
     information in writing, the concerned police employee shall set down
     all matters of information given by the person in the form referred to
     in Schedule-5, read out the same to, and cause it to be signed by, that
     person.

           (3)     If a person makes in person a first information report or
     gives information referred to in sub-section (1) to the concerned
     police office, or sends such information through any person or
     electronic means, such police office shall register such report or
     information and give that person a receipt thereof, in the form
     referred to in Schedule-6. If any person gives information through
     electronic means, acknowledgement of receipt of such information
     shall be given through the same means.




                                                                          5
      (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
(2) or (3), if the police receives any report or information about the
commission of any offence set forth in Schedule-1 from any other
source or on his or her own, the police shall prepare a report along
with the details set forth in Schedule-5.

      (5)    The police office shall enter the first information report,
information referred to in this Section or the report referred to in sub-
section (4) in a register in the form referred to in Schedule-7.

      (6)    Any first information report or information received
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be forwarded to the separate
investigating authority, if any, specified by law in relation to such
report or information, and, failing the specification of such separate
investigating authority, to the concerned district police office.

      (7)    A person wishing to give information about any offence
set forth in Schedule-2 shall give such information, in the form
referred to in Schedule-5, to the office or authority empowered to
investigate into that offence.

      (8)    The concerned office or authority shall register the
information received pursuant to sub-section (7) and give a receipt
thereof, in the form referred to in Schedule-6, to the person who
gives such information.

      (9)    If it is not possible to immediately register the
information referred to in sub-section (7) in the concerned office or
authority, such information may also be given to the nearby police
office.




                                                                       6
            (10) The concerned police office shall, if it receives any
     information pursuant to sub-section (9), register such information
     pursuant to sub-section (5) and forward it to the concerned office or
     authority not later than three days for action.

5.   Complaint against refusal to register first information report or
     information: (1) If the concerned police office refuses to register a
     first information report made or information given pursuant to sub-
     section (1) of Section 4, the person making or giving such first
     information report or information may make a complaint setting out
     such matter, accompanied by the first information report or
     information, to the concerned district government attorney office or
     the police office higher in level than the police office required to
     register such first information report or information.

            (2)   If a complaint referred to in sub-section (1) is received,
     the concerned district government attorney office or police office
     shall maintain records thereof and forward such first information
     report or information to the concerned police office for necessary
     action.

            (3)   The concerned police office shall, in accordance with
     sub-section (3) of Section 4, register and take action on the first
     information report or information received pursuant to sub-section
     (2).

            (4)   If the office or authority referred to in sub-section (7) of
     Section 4 refuses to register any information referred to in that sub-
     section, the person giving such information may make a complaint
     setting out the matter, accompanied by the information of offence, to
     the Chief District Officer of the concerned district.


                                                                            7
           Provided that where the Chief District Officer himself or
     herself is designated as the investigating authority and refuses to
     register such information, such complaint may be made to the
     Ministry of Home Affairs.

           (5)      Upon receipt of any complaint referred to in sub-section
     (4), the concerned Chief District Officer or the Ministry of Home
     Affairs shall decide, within three days, as to whether or not to
     register such information, and give direction to the concerned office
     to take, or cause to be taken, action accordingly.

           (6)      Upon receipt of any direction referred to in sub-section
     (5), the concerned office or authority shall take action in pursuance
     of the direction.

6.   Arrangements to be made to prevent evidence from being
     concealed or destructed and prevent offender from escaping: (1)
     If any police office or police employee gets information that any
     offence set forth in Schedule-1 has been committed or is being
     committed or is likely to be committed, such office or employee
     shall, as promptly as possible, make necessary and effective
     arrangements in order to prevent the offender from committing the
     offence or prevent any evidence related to the offence from being
     disappeared or destructed and prevent the offender from going away
     or escaping.

           (2)      If there is a likelihood of the concealment or destruction
     of any evidence related to the offence or the escaping or going away
     of the offender where immediate action is not taken pursuant to sub-
     section (1), such police office or employee may take necessary action




                                                                            8
in that behalf, even by entering the area of another police office, as
per necessity.

      (3)    In the event of a need for taking any action by entering
the area of another police office pursuant to sub-section (2), such
police office or employee shall give information thereof to the
concerned police office or body and the higher police office.

      (4)    If the concerned authority comes to know, on his or her
own initiative or on information made by any one, that any offence
set forth in Schedule-2 has been committed or is being committed or
is likely to be committed, such authority shall take action referred to
in sub-section (1) or (2).

      Provided that if any police employee receives information
about such offence and the concerned investigating authority is not
available for the time being, such police employee shall take action
referred to in sub-section (1) and send the statements of such action,
together with the person, if any arrested, to the investigating
authority.

      (5)    Any police employee or investigating authority may ask
any body, authority or person to render assistance in preventing the
disappearance or destruction of any evidence related to the offence
or in arresting the offender; and it shall be the duty of such body,
authority or person to render necessary assistance wherever such
assistance is so asked for.

      (6)    If a police employee sees a person committing an
offence in his or her presence or at a time when the police employee
is there in search of clues upon receipt of a notice, information or




                                                                     9
     clue that such offence has been committed or is being committed or
     is likely to be committed, the police employee shall immediately
     arrest the person committing such offence.

            (7)   The police employee shall take possession of exhibits
     and other proofs, evidence or things related to the offence, if any,
     found on the spot and execute a deed thereon, as required, in the
     presence of the eye witnesses, if any, present on the spot.

            (8)   Such thing, place or spot shall be protected as it is until
     the completion of the execution of such deed pursuant to sub-section
     (7).

            (9)   Where it is not possible to immediately seize or take
     possession of the exhibits and other evidence or things related to the
     offence obtained pursuant to sub-section (7), the concerned police
     employee may make a request to the Local Level or any other office
     to safely retain such exhibits or things, and the concerned Level or
     office shall, when so requested, take custody of such exhibits or
     evidence and give a receipt thereof.

            Provided that the goods not related to the offence shall be
     immediately returned to the concerned person.

7.   Information to be given to concerned police office: (1) If the any
     police office knows, from the contents of information received by it
     in relation to any offence set forth in Schedule-1or on its own
     initiative, that such offence has been committed or is being
     committed or is likely to be committed in the area of another police
     office, such police office shall, as soon as possible, send such




                                                                          10
     information to the concerned police office, and inform the informant
     to appear in the concerned police office, as required.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if there is a possibility that the offender may escape and any exhibits
     or evidence related to the offence may disappear due to the non-
     availability of the investigating authority for the time being because
     of geographical remoteness or any other cause, the competent
     investigating officer of the concerned police office receiving such
     information shall make preliminary investigation into the offence
     committed in such area and send details of such investigation to the
     concerned police office.

           (3)    Such authority shall, prior to making preliminary
     investigation pursuant to sub-section (2), give information to the
     concerned police office and the one level higher police office.

8.   Collection of proof and evidence upon making investigation: (1)
     Upon receipt of any information that an offence set forth in
     Schedule-1 has been committed or is being committed or is likely to
     be committed, the concerned police office shall, as soon as possible,
     designate a police employee whose rank is at least assistant sub-
     inspector as the investigating authority and give information thereof
     to the concerned government attorney office and the higher police
     office; and the investigating authority so designated shall conduct
     investigation into such offence.

           Provided that a police employee whose rank is at least police
     inspector shall be designated to investigate into any of the following
     offences:




                                                                         11
      (a)   Offences set forth in Chapter-1, Chapter-12, Chapter-
            17, Section 219 of Chapter-18, Sections 230, 231, 232,
            sub-section (4) of Section 233, Section 235, sub-section
            (4) of Section 238 of Chapter-19, Section 244 of
            Chapter-20, Sections 256, 257 and 258 of Chapter 22,
            of Part-2 of the Penal Code,

      (b)   Offences related to narcotic drugs, human trafficking
            and transportation and foreign exchange,

      (c)   Any other offence so specified by the Government of
            Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, taking into
            account the gravity of the offence.

      (2)   The investigating authority shall, in conducting
investigation under this Section, prepare a deed on the scene of crime
containing the following matters, as far as practicable, in such
manner as to demonstrate the actual description of the offence and
the place where the offence was committed:

      (a)   The date and time when the offence was committed,

      (b)   The address, description and sketch of the place where
            the offence was committed,

      (c)   The circumstance of such place and its connection with
            the offence or offender,

      (d)   The exhibits or evidence found or seen at or around the
            place where the offence was committed, and any other
            significant matters related to the offence.

      (3)   After preparing a deed on the scene of offence pursuant
to sub-section (2), the investigating authority may, as far as


                                                                   12
practicable, take a photograph of such place and of any finger print
or foot print, mark or other exhibits seen or found at such place or
any other important matter that may be helpful in establishing the
guilt.

         (4)   In preparing a deed on the scene of crime pursuant to
sub-section (2), thumb impressions as well as identity disclosing
details of the offender or accused person, if present, shall also be
taken.

         (5)   The investigating authority shall take possession of the
exhibits, evidence, object or article related to the offence, if any
found.

         (6)   The authority taking possession of any exhibits,
evidence, object or article pursuant to sub-section (5) shall give a
receipt thereof to the concerned person.

         (7)   Investigation into any of the offences set forth in
Schedule-2 shall be conducted by the authority, if any, specified by
law to that effect, and, failing the specification of such authority, by
the concerned chief district officer or officer level employee
designated by him or her.

         (8)   The authority specified pursuant to sub-section (7) shall,
in conducting investigation into such offence, fulfill the procedures
set forth in sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6).

         (9)   In conducting investigation into any offence committed
on the same occasion pursuant to this Chapter, investigation into all
cases that may be instituted from the acts done on such occasion
shall be conducted at the same time.



                                                                      13
9.   Power to arrest person related to offence: (1) The police or
     investigating authority may arrest any person related to an offence if
     such person is found or caught in the course of committing the
     offence.

           (2)     If, in the course of investigation into any offence, it is
     necessary to arrest any person immediately in accordance with this
     Chapter, an application, along with the reason for such arrest, and the
     details disclosing the identity of the person to be arrested, as far as
     practicable, shall be made to the adjudicating authority for
     permission to issue a warrant of arrest.

           (3)     If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (2) and
     the reason for arrest appears to be reasonable, the adjudicating
     authority may, on the same application, give permission to issue a
     warrant of arrest.

           (4)     The form of a warrant of arrest shall be as referred to in
     Schedule-8.

           (5)     The order referred to in sub-section (3) shall not be
     disclosed until the person to be arrested is arrested.

           (6)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
     if a person who is not arrested at once or there is a reasonable ground
     to believe that such person may abscond, escape or destroy the
     evidence, exhibits or proof, such person shall be arrested
     immediately upon issuing an urgent warrant of arrest in the form
     referred to in Schedule-9, and the matter shall be submitted to the
     adjudicating authority, along with the person so arrested, for
     permission.




                                                                          14
      (7)    If any person is arrested upon issuing an urgent warrant
of arrest pursuant to sub-section (6), no other investigation related
proceedings related to such offence may be initiated without
obtaining permission from the adjudicating authority.

      (8)    If the police is not available for the time being at the
time of commission of any offence, any person who is present at the
time of commission of that offence or who is eye witness thereto
may prevent the person committing such offence from going away or
escaping and hand him or her over to the nearby police office.

      (9)    If it is necessary to arrest a person pursuant to sub-
section (1) or (6), such person shall, prior to arresting him or her, be
informed of the cause necessitating his or her arrest and reminded,
persuaded and ordered to surrender himself or herself.

      (10) If, in spite of the remainder, persuasion or order under
sub-section (9), any person does not surrender himself or herself but
makes attempt to evade, escape or avoid arrest or confronts or
attempts to confront in any manner, with or without the use of force,
the police employee may use necessary force to arrest him or her.

      (11) If a woman is to be arrested pursuant to this Section, the
woman shall be arrested by a female police as far as possible.

      Provided that if a female police is not available for the time
being to arrest such woman, nothing shall bar the arresting of such
woman by a male police employee in such manner as to respect her
physical sensitivity and as not to undermine her dignity or prestige.

      (12) A person who is arrested pursuant to this Section or his
or her body may be searched.



                                                                        15
            (13) If there is a reasonable ground to suspect that any
      person to be arrested pursuant to this Section is residing in any house
      or place, that person may be arrested by making search of such house
      or place.

            (14) If a person is arrested upon making search pursuant to
      sub-section (13), the body of such person may also be searched.

            (15) The person who arrests such person or investigating
      authority shall take custody of any evidence related document or
      exhibits, evidence or any other thing found during the search made
      pursuant to sub-section (12) or (13), and give a receipt thereof.

            (16) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if any person commits any offence under Schedule-1 or
      Schedule-2 in the presence of any police employee or authority or in
      any government office, the concerned police employee, authority or
      chief of office may, as required, arrest such person.

10.   Preliminary investigation report to be forwarded: (1) The
      investigating authority or police employee designated to investigate
      into any of the offences set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2 shall
      conduct preliminary investigation immediately after a first
      information report or information as to the commission of such
      offence has been registered pursuant to Section 4.

            (2)    Such investigating authority or police employee shall,
      after the commencement of the preliminary investigation pursuant to
      sub-section (1), forward a report thereof to the district government
      attorney office within three days.




                                                                          16
            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      "preliminary investigation" means the description of the scene of
      offence, deed on the scene of crime, search or seizure deed or deed
      of examination of corpse in the case of homicide, and, in the case of
      other offence, report, deed or other necessary description required to
      be prepared depending on the nature of such offence.

            (3)      The government attorney may, upon receipt of a
      preliminary report pursuant to sub-section (1), give necessary
      instruction, accompanied by the reasons, to the investigating
      authority if the attorney thinks, on studying the report, that it is
      expedient to give such instruction to conduct further investigation
      into any matter in connection with the offence.

            (4)      It shall be the duty of the concerned investigating
      authority to comply with the instruction given pursuant to sub-
      section (3).

11.   Power to abate deceptive, false or fabricated information: (1) If,
      also upon inquiring into the concerned person or informant in
      relation to the first information report or report received as to any
      offence set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, it appears that it is
      unnecessary or meaningless to conduct investigation into such
      offence by the reason that such report or information is deceptive,
      false or fabricated, the concerned police office shall send a report
      setting out that matter to the concerned government attorney office
      not later than three days in general cases.

            (2)      Upon receipt of a report pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      concerned government attorney office may abate the investigation
      into such offence for the time being subject to the conducting of


                                                                           17
      investigation as and when additional evidence is found if there is no
      reasonable ground to conduct such investigation immediately or give
      direction, accompanied by the reason, to the investigating authority
      to conduct further investigation if, upon studying the nature of
      commission of offence on that occasion, it thinks appropriate to
      conduct investigation immediately.

              (3)   If the government attorney office gives direction to
      conduct investigation pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned
      investigating authority shall conduct investigation into such offence.

12.   Power to form special team to conduct investigation: (1)
      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the
      Inspector General of Police or the pertinent superior authority of the
      investigating authority is of the opinion that it is appropriate to form
      a separate investigating team to conduct investigation into any
      offence set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2 of this Act by the
      reason that such investigation cannot be conducted by the designated
      investigating authority alone in view of the gravity of that offence,
      the Inspector General of Police or such superior authority may form
      an investigating team consisting of his or her subordinate employees.

              (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if it is required to form an investigating team consisting of other
      persons also, in addition to his or her subordinate employees, the
      pertinent superior authority of such investigating authority or the
      Inspector General of Police may, in consultation with the Attorney
      General on that matter, form an investigating team consisting of
      experts as well, and cause such investigation to be conducted by that
      team.



                                                                           18
             (3)   If an investigating team is formed pursuant to sub-
      section (1) or (2), such team shall conduct investigation, in exercise
      of the powers conferred to the investigating authority under this
      Chapter.

             (4)   If an investigating team is formed pursuant to sub-
      section (1) or (2), the concerned investigating authority shall hand
      over to such team the details of investigation conducted by him or
      her.

             (5)   The investigating team formed pursuant to sub-section
      (1) or (2) shall conduct investigation and submit its report to the
      concerned government attorney and give information thereof to the
      concerned police office, as well.

             (6)   If, upon receipt of a report pursuant to sub-section (5),
      the government attorney considers it necessary to give necessary
      direction to conduct further investigation on any matter related to the
      offence, he or she may give necessary direction, accompanied by the
      reason therefor, to the investigating team.

             (7)   It shall be the duty of the concerned investigating team
      to comply with the direction given by the government attorney
      pursuant to sub-section (6).

13.   To hold in detention: (1) A person who is arrested in accordance
      with this Chapter shall be held in detention.

             (2)   A person shall be detained pursuant to sub-section (1),
      only upon serving on such person a warrant for detention in the form
      referred to in Schedule-10, setting out the place where such person
      was arrested and the reason for holding in detention.



                                                                          19
            (3)    If any person is detained pursuant to sub-section (1),
      there shall be prepared his or her records containing, inter alia, his or
      her name, surname, age, address including street, father's name,
      mother's name, citizenship certificate or other identity card, if any,
      disclosing his or her identity, and failing such certificate or card,
      driving license, passport, telephone number, if any, and duplicate
      copies of similar documents setting out his or her real identity.

            (4)    For the purposes of sub-section (3), the investigating
      authority may, as required, also take his or her photograph and
      thumb impressions of both hands, with palms.

            (5)    After the preparation of the records pursuant to sub-
      section (3), the concerned police office or investigating authority
      shall give information, based on such records, about his or her
      detention to the person specified by the person held in detention to
      receive such information.

            (6)    If a person arrested pursuant to this Section intends to
      consult a law practitioner, the investigating authority shall allow him
      or her to consult such law practitioner.

14.   Period during which one may be held in detention for
      investigation, and procedures relating thereto: (1) After a person
      has been arrested under this Chapter for investigation into any
      offence, the person shall be produced before the adjudicating
      authority as soon as possible within twenty-four hours.

            (2)    No person shall be held in detention in contravention of
      sub-section (1).




                                                                            20
      (3)    If it is necessary to hold any person in detention for a
period exceeding that set forth in sub-section (1), the investigating
authority shall make an application for remand, accompanied by the
reasons and grounds for such detention, to the adjudicating authority
through the government attorney office.

      Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the period
required for the journey from the place of arrest to the police office
or from the police office to the court for the purpose of producing the
person arrested before the adjudicating authority within twenty-four
hours shall not be counted.

      (4)    The application made by the investigating authority to
the adjudicating authority pursuant to sub-section (3) shall clearly
state the charge made against the detained person, grounds of such
charge, reason for detaining him or her for investigation and details
according to his or her deposition, if made.

      (5)    A person who is produced for a remand for detention
pursuant to sub-section (2) may, if he or she so wishes, make an
application to the adjudicating authority for the physical examination
of his or her body.

      (6)    If the investigating authority requests for a remand for
detention of a person pursuant to sub-section (3), the adjudicating
authority may remand such person in detention for a maximum
period of twenty-five days at one time or several times if, upon
studying the relevant documents and also upon hearing the pleadings
of the legal practitioner concerned, if considered necessary, the
adjudicating authority thinks that it is necessary to keep on detaining
such person for investigation.


                                                                    21
      (7)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6),
both the investigating authority and the government attorney may
submit to the adjudicating authority a report, along with the reason,
that investigation into any offence related to assault on the President,
espionage, giving provocation to the desertion of a soldier, waging
war against the State of Nepal, assistance to the army of a state
involved in a war against Nepal, explosives, kidnapping or hostage-
taking, out of the offences under Schedule-1, cannot be completed
within the period given under sub-section (6).

      (8)    If a report referred to in sub-section (7) is submitted, the
adjudicating authority may, having regard to the status of
investigation, remand the accused person in detention for a
maximum of additional fifteen days at one time or several times.

      Provided that no person accused of any offence may be held in
detention for a period exceeding the term of imprisonment that is
imposable on him or her if he or she is held guilty thereof.

      (9)    In issuing a remand order pursuant to sub-section (6) or
(8), the adjudicating authority shall execute a memorandum,
accompanied by the reasons therefor.

      (10) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the investigating authority, in view of the nature of the
offence, thinks it reasonable to conduct investigation without holding
in detention a woman with pregnancy of more than seven months, a
child, and a person over 75 years of age, such authority may conduct
investigation by remanding such woman, child or person on
recognizance, and executing a memorandum to that effect,
accompanied by the reasons therefor.


                                                                      22
15.   Power of investigating authority to release person held in
      detention: (1) If it does not appear necessary or appropriate to keep
      on detaining a person held in detention in the course of investigation
      under this Act, the investigating authority may, with the consent of
      the government attorney or by executing a memorandum,
      accompanied by the reasons therefor, where it is not possible to
      obtain such consent for the time being, remand such person on
      bail/bond or guarantee or personal guarantee furnished by any
      reliable person or on recognizance to appear on appointed days.

            (2)    In remanding any person on bail/bond, or on
      recognizance to appear on appointed days pursuant to sub-section
      (1), a deed shall be caused to be executed by the person so released,
      covenanting that he or she shall appear when it becomes necessary to
      institute the case against him or her.

            (3)    A person who furnishes personal guarantee pursuant to
      sub-section (1) shall cause the person released on his or her personal
      guarantee to appear at such time as appointed by the investigating
      authority or government attorney office.

            (4)    If a person who furnishes personal guarantee fails to
      cause such person to appear at the time appointed pursuant to sub-
      section (3), he or she shall be liable to a fine of five thousand rupees.

            (5)    Where investigation has been conducted by remanding a
      person on recognizance to appear on appointed days, the
      investigating authority shall give information thereof to the
      government attorney and the higher police office.




                                                                             23
16.   Deposition and interrogation: (1) The investigating authority may
      take deposition from the accused in relation to any offence under
      Schedule-1 or Schedule-2 in the presence of the government
      attorney.

            (2)    In taking deposition pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      government attorney shall have the right to ask necessary matter as
      required to be set out in relation to the offence.

            (3)    The investigating      authority shall   interrogate, as
      necessary, any person, who is believed, based on a reasonable
      ground, to have knowledge of any important matter in connection
      with any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2.

            Provided that if it is required to interrogate any child or any
      person who is physically incompetent, such child or person may be
      interrogated at his or her abode.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
      "physically incompetent" means a physically incompetent person
      such as one who cannot make movement, who is with visual
      impairment or who is of elderly age.

             (4)   The investigating authority shall, if interrogation is
      made pursuant to sub-section (3), record the matters interrogated in
      the form referred to in Schedule-11 and attach the same with the
      concerned case-file.

            (5)    If it is necessary to have a document executed by a child
      or physically incompetent person pursuant to this Section, it shall be
      executed in presence of his or her guardian or other person available.




                                                                          24
            (6)    If any person who is to make deposition or be
      interrogated pursuant to this Section is not able to present before the
      investigating authority for the reason of physical illness or it is not
      appropriate to cause his or her presence before such authority for the
      reason of his or her security, the investigating authority may take
      statement of or interrogate such person through video conference.

            (7)    The investigating authority shall, if statement is taken or
      interrogation made pursuant to sub-section (6), arrange for
      maintaining the records thereof.

17.   To answer question asked: The concerned person shall assist in
      investigation by giving answer, to the best of his or her knowledge,
      to any question asked by the investigating authority in connection
      with any offence being investigated under this Chapter.

            Provided that no person shall be compelled to give any answer
      which might be of self-incriminatory nature.

18.   Power to make search: (1) If, in conducting investigation into any
      offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, the investigating authority
      has a reasonable ground to suspect that any document, exhibit,
      evidence, accused or other person connected with such offence is in
      any place, the authority may search such person or place and seize
      such document, exhibit or evidence.

            (2)    Prior to making a search pursuant to sub-section (1),
      there shall be served on the person residing for the time being in the
      house to be searched a notice in writing, accompanied by the reason
      for making search, in the form referred to in Schedule-12.




                                                                           25
      (3)    In making a search pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall
be made upon executing a deed in the form referred to in Schedule-
13.

      (4)    The investigating authority shall get the concerned
house owner or person to search him or her as well, prior to entering
into such place in order to make search pursuant to sub-section (1).

      (5)    In making a search of a house or room where only
women reside or stay pursuant to sub-section (1), such search shall
be made by entering into such house or room, being accompanied by
another wamen also, as far as possible.

      Provided that in searching the body of a woman, such search
shall be caused to be made by a female police or by any other
woman if such police is not available for the time being.

      (6)    The employee making search shall prepare a deed in
duplicate containing the description of the objects connected with the
offence found during search, the scene and circumstance thereof,
give one copy of the deed to the concerned person and retain the
other copy in the case-file.

      (7)    If a person or place to be searched is located in the area
under jurisdiction of another police office, the investigating authority
may make a request in writing to such police office to make search
of such person or place.

      (8)    If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (7), a police
employee of that police office whose rank is at least assistant sub-
inspector of police shall search such person or place, prepare a deed




                                                                       26
referred to in sub-section (1) and send it to the authority making such
request.

      (9)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7),
if the investigating authority thinks that any evidence could be
concealed or destroyed in the event of making a request in writing to
such police office, the investigating authority himself or herself may
go to the place or site where the person to be searched is staying and
search such person or place pursuant to this Section and shall give
information thereof to the concerned office or police office.

      (10) If the authority making search pursuant to this Section
wishes to take with him or her any object connected with the offence
and found in the course of making search, he or she may do so only
after giving a receipt thereof to the concerned person.

      (11) Except where there is a reasonable ground to believe
that any exhibit or evidence may be concealed or destroyed or the
suspected person may flee or escape if search of any place is not
made immediately, the search of a house owned by any person shall
be made any time from the sunrise to the sunset.

      (12) Where the authority making search seeks an entry into
any house or place in the course of making a search pursuant to this
Section, the owner of the house or place or the person who has taken
charge of such house or place or any other person residing there for
the time being shall allow such authority to enter into such house or
place, by opening its gate or door or in any other manner, and if such
entry is denied, the authority making search may enter into the house
or place by breaking the key, if any, or breaking or demolishing only
such parts of the windows, doors, roofs, walls etc. of such house or


                                                                    27
      place as may be necessary to enter into such house or place and in
      such manner as to cause minimal loss or damage as far as possible.

            (13) If, for any reason, it is not possible for a person who has
      entered into any house or place to exit from it in a normal way after
      making search pursuant to this Section, the person may exit from it
      by breaking or demolishing any such part of its windows, doors,
      roofs, walls etc. as may be necessary to exit from it and in such
      manner as to cause minimal loss or damage as far as possible.

            (14) Search must be made without carrying any objects other
      than the clothes put on by the authority making search and any
      employee deputed to assist the authority in making search and the
      persons in whose presence the search is made pursuant to sub-section
      (5) of Section 16 and the items to be used in the operation of search;
      and the concerned person may, if he or she so wishes, search the
      body of any such authority, employee or other persons prior to the
      commencement of the operation of search.

            (15) The authority who is competent to search any person,
      house or place pursuant to this Section shall, prior to making such
      search, show his or her identity card to the concerned house owner,
      place owner or person to ensure that he or she is the authority
      competent to make such search.

19.   Requirement of presence in executing deeds: (1) The investigating
      authority shall, in preparing a deed on the scene of crime, describing
      the real and actual facts of the scene of such offence, prepare it in
      accordance with sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of Section 8.




                                                                           28
            (2)    In preparing a deed on the scene of crime pursuant to
      sub-section (1) or searching any person, object or place or examining
      the corpse, in the case of homicide, or, in the case of commission of
      any other offence, in preparing necessary deeds depending on the
      nature of such offence, such deed or deeds shall be executed in the
      presence of at least two local people available at that place and one
      member of the Local Level or if no such member is available, one
      employee of the government office, if any, and the accused persons
      who are found out as well as the informant.

            Provided that such deed on the scene of crime shall not be
      considered as unduly executed by the reason only that it has not been
      executed in the presence of the accused or the informant.

            (3)    In making a search of any place under the ownership or
      charge of a person, the search shall be made in the presence of such
      person also, if available.

20.   Examination of corpse to be made: (1) If information is received
      that a person is dead due to culpable homicide or accident or suicide
      or in an unusual situation or in any other suspicious circumstance,
      the investigating authority shall immediately go to the place where
      the corpse is located and examine the corpse.

            (2)     In examining the corpse pursuant to sub-section (1), a
      deed containing, as far as practicable, the following matters, in the
      form referred to in Schedule-14, and take photographs of the corpse
      and the concerned scene in a manner to describe the actual situation
      of the corpse:

            (a)    The identifying description of the corpse,




                                                                        29
      (b)    The circumstances of the place where the corpse is
             located and of the corpse,

      (c)    If any wound, injury, bruise, abrasion or mark is seen on
             the corpse, the description of each wound, injury,
             bruise, abrasion or mark including the part where such
             wound, injury, bruise, abrasion or mark is seen, the
             number, length, breadth, depth and description thereof,

      (d)    Description of the instrument causing such death and
             the related description seen on the corpse, other than
             those mentioned in clause (c),

      (e)    Any such other sign or symptom seen on the corpse that
             could be helpful in finding out the cause of death,

      (f)    Description of other significant matters, if any.

      (3)    The concerned investigating authority shall, upon
examining the corpse pursuant to sub-section (1), send the corpse to
a government medical doctor or an expert designated in that behalf
by the Government of Nepal or a licensed medical doctor for post-
mortem, at the government expenses.

      (4)    The Government of Nepal shall make available to the
concerned police office such expenses as required for post-mortem
pursuant to sub-section (3).

      (5)    A report of post-mortem conducted pursuant to sub-
section (3) shall be prepared in the form referred to in Schedule-15.

      (6)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
if, after the execution of the deed on examination of the corpse
pursuant to sub-section (1), it does not appear, from such


                                                                    30
examination of corpse, that the death was caused as a result of the
commission of any offence or in a suspicious circumstance, and the
investigating authority concludes that the post mortem of the corpse
is not necessary, he or she shall execute a memorandum thereon,
setting out the reasons for the same, in the presence of distinguished
local persons and retain the memorandum in the case-file.

      (7)    If it is not possible or seems impossible to examine the
corpse because of the corpse being decayed or rotted, the concerned
investigating authority shall execute a deed setting out that matter, in
the presence of local distinguished persons.

      Provided that if, in spite of the corpse being decayed or rotten,
there is a situation that the cause of death can be found out by other
examination of the corpse or any of its parts, such other scientific
examination may be carried out.

      (8)    After the completion of post mortem or execution of the
deed pursuant to sub-section (6), the concerned police employee
shall hand over the corpse to the successor to the deceased and get a
receipt from the latter.

      (9)    If the successor refuses to receive the corpse pursuant to
sub-section (8) or no successor is present or the successor cannot be
identified, the concerned police employee shall perform the last rites
and rituals of the corpse at government expenses.

      (10) If the investigating authority deems it appropriate to be
accompanied by the concerned expert in the course of examining the
corpse or conducting post mortem or collecting any other proof or
evidence, he or she may also be accompanied by such expert.




                                                                     31
              (11) If the expert or medical doctor examining a corpse or
      conducting the post mortem pursuant to this Section thinks that it is
      necessary to conduct the post mortem by a team consisting of more
      than one expert in order to find out the real cause of death or the
      investigating authority thinks that it is necessary to have the post
      mortem conducted by a team of experts in order to find out the cause
      of death of a person, the post mortem may be conducted by such
      team.

21.   Examination of physical evidence to be made: (1) If the
      investigating authority thinks, in view of the nature of any offence,
      that evidence related to that offence can be obtained if the
      examination of the blood, semen, hair or any other part of body of
      the concerned person or arms, thing or object, DNA or any other
      matter is conducted in order to find out the offender, he or she may
      cause the examination of such blood, semen, hair or other part of
      body, arms, thing, object, DNA or any other physical evidence to be
      conducted by a government medical doctor or recognized laboratory.

              Provided that if it is required to examine any bodily organ of a
      woman, such examination shall be caused to be conducted by any
      female doctor, if available, and by a male doctor in the presence of a
      woman if such female doctor is not available.

              (2)   The concerned person shall assist the investigating
      authority in the provision of a sample of blood, semen, hair or organ,
      arms or object required for the examination pursuant to sub-section
      (1).

              (3)   The concerned doctor or laboratory shall prepare a
      report of examination conducted pursuant to sub-section (1).


                                                                           32
22.   Examination of injury: (1) If any person sustains any injury,
      wound, bruise, abrasion etc. on his or her body in an incident that
      happened because of hurt and makes application for the examination
      of injury or the investigating authority so requests, the government
      doctor or health worker shall examine his or her injury, wound,
      bruise, abrasion etc. and prepare a report of such examination in the
      form referred to in Schedule-16.

            (2)    If, in addition to that mentioned in sub-section (1), a
      person held in detention in the course of investigation or any other
      person on his or her behalf makes an application, accompanied by
      the reasonable ground, stating that evidence may be found, upon the
      examination of his or her body, that he or she has been subjected to
      hurt or torture or any other offence has been committed to him or
      her, the court may order that physical examination of such person be
      conducted by a government doctor or a doctor or health worker
      designated by the Government of Nepal.

            (3)    Even in conducting physical examination pursuant to
      sub-section (2), injury examination referred to in sub-section (1)
      shall also be conducted.

            (4)    The concerned doctor, expert or laboratory shall provide
      a report of examination conducted pursuant to Sections 20, 21 and
      this Section to the concerned office or investigating authority not
      later than three days after the date of such examination, excluding
      the time required for journey.

            (5)    If it appears that a person held in detention was
      subjected to hurt or torture as referred to in sub-section (2), the court
      shall order the concerned police office to have treatment of the


                                                                            33
      person so subjected to hurt or torture, provide an interim relief to him
      or her and take, in accordance with law, departmental action against
      the person who so subjected him or her to hurt or torture.

            (6)     If the investigating authority does not write to the
      government doctor or health worker for the examination of injury
      pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned person may make a
      petition explaining that matter to the court, and the court may, if such
      petition is made, send a precept to the government doctor or health
      worker for such examination.

23.   Expert opinion may be obtained: (1) The investigating authority
      may, if he or she so deems necessary, be accompanied by any expert
      in the course of investigation or seek opinion of any expert on any
      matter connected with the offence.

            (2)     It shall be the duty of the concerned expert to give his or
      her opinion if he or she is so asked pursuant to sub-section (1).

            (3)     The expert opinion given pursuant to sub-section (2)
      shall be recorded in the case-file.

            (4)     If any expert referred to in this Section is a non-
      governmental person, the Government of Nepal shall provide
      expenses to be incurred in the obtaining of his or her service.

            (5)     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if the investigating authority, for the reason of the sensitivity
      or complexity of any case, considers appropriate to do so, and makes
      recommendation for obtaining the opinion of the medical board or
      any other expert in such case, the Government of Nepal may form
      such board.



                                                                             34
              (6)   If a board is formed pursuant to sub-section (5), the
      board shall give opinion on that matter.

24.   Identification to be made: (1) If it is necessary to identify any
      person in connection with any case, a police employee whose rank is
      at least assistant sub-inspector of police shall cause such
      identification to be made.

              Provided that the proceedings of a case shall not be affected
      substantially by the reason only that such identification has not been
      made.

              (2)   In having identification pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      person to be identified shall be kept in a place where such person
      cannot be seen and looked, and at least four persons who resemble to
      such person in age, color or physical structure shall, as far as
      practicable, be dressed uniformly, with whom such person shall be
      kept together, and every person making identification shall make
      identification separately.

              (3)   The form of identification shall be as referred to in
      Schedule-17.

              (4)   The matter as to whether the person making
      identification was able to make identification pursuant to sub-section
      (2) shall be recorded and retained in the case-file.

              (5)   A police employee whose rank is at least assistant sub-
      inspector of police may cause to be made the identification of any
      exhibit, thing or object connected with any case, by executing a deed
      on identification.




                                                                          35
25.   Police diary to be maintained: (1) Every police officer conducting
      investigation under this Chapter shall maintain a police diary, in the
      form referred to in Schedule-18, in which every proceeding made by
      him or her in the course of investigation shall be recorded
      immediately.

            (2)   Such police officer shall record the following matters in
      the diary maintained pursuant to sub-section (1):

            (a)   The date and time of receipt of information about the
                  offence, and the resume thereof,

            (b)   The activities carried out by him or her in the course of
                  investigation,

            (c)   The place or scene which he or she has visited in the
                  course of investigation,

            (d)   The exhibits, proofs, evidence or other necessary things
                  found in the course of investigation,

            (e)   Details of the person, if any, arrested in the course of
                  investigation,

            (f)   The name, address of each person whom he or she has
                  interrogated in the course of investigation, and matters
                  stated by such person in relation to the offence,

            (g)   Nature of the person arrested or inquired,

            (h)   Other relevant fact or information obtained in the course
                  of investigation of the offence.




                                                                         36
             (3)     The government attorney or court may, as required,
      procure and examine the police diary maintained pursuant to in sub-
      section (1).

             (4)     The authority higher than the concerned investigating
      authority may, if he or she so wishes, inspect the matters set forth in
      the diary maintained pursuant to sub-section (1) and also give
      necessary direction in connection with the investigation.

26.   Advice, opinion may be sought in relation to investigation: (1)
      The    concerned     investigating   authority   may,   in   conducting
      investigation pursuant to this Chapter, seek advice or opinion of the
      government attorney on any matter.

             (2)     If advice or opinion is sought pursuant to sub-section
      (1), the concerned government attorney shall give his or her advice
      or opinion.

             (3)     If, in giving advice or opinion pursuant to sub-section
      (2), the government attorney deems that it is necessary to carry out
      further investigation into any matter or to collect further evidence or
      to seize any exhibit, evidence or to inquire any person into any
      matter, the government attorney may direct the investigating
      authority to do, or cause to be done, accordingly.

             (4)     It shall be the duty of the concerned investigating
      authority to comply with the direction given pursuant to sub-section
      (3).

27.   Power of the Attorney General to give direction in the course of
      investigation: (1) The Attorney General may obtain necessary




                                                                           37
      information about the investigation undergoing into any criminal
      case to be filed by the Government of Nepal.

            (2)    If, upon having information pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the Attorney General is of the opinion that investigation into any
      criminal offence which is a state case is insufficient or that any
      special measure, method or mode required to be adopted or followed
      have not been adopted or followed during investigation into such
      offence or that further investigation should be conducted into such
      offence, he or she may, at any time, give direction to the
      investigating authority or the departmental head of that authority in
      respect of the investigation.

            (3)    It shall be the duty of the concerned authority to comply
      with the direction given pursuant to sub-section (2).

28.   Records of first information reports to be maintained: (1) The
      investigating authority, in making petition to the court for a remand
      to hold the arrested person in detention pursuant to sub-section (3) of
      Section 14, shall submit one copy of the first information report or
      information, which was made or given to the police office or the
      investigating authority, to the adjudicating authority through the
      government attorney.

            (2)    The adjudicating authority shall maintain separate
      records of the report or information referred to in sub-section (1).

29.   Power to forward the matter to the concerned body:
      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if, in the
      course of investigating into any offence under Schedule-1 or
      Schedule-2, it appears that the offence has to be investigated into




                                                                             38
      under other law, the matter, accompanied by the progress details of
      investigation, may be forwarded to the concerned body or authority
      for investigation into it.

30.   Investigation into offence committed outside Nepal: (1) If there is
      a legal provision that a case can be instituted in a court of Nepal in
      relation to an offence that was committed or took place outside
      Nepal, investigation conducted into such offence by fulfilling the
      following procedures shall, notwithstanding anything contained
      elsewhere in this Act, be deemed to have been duly conducted under
      this Act:

             (a)    Any investigation conducted in accordance with the
                    provisions of the treaty, if any, concluded with any
                    country providing that investigation into any criminal
                    offence, in respect of which a case may be instituted in a
                    court of Nepal, can be conducted by the competent
                    authorities of each other country,

             (b)    Failing a treaty referred to in clause (a), any
                    investigation conducted by the investigating authority
                    designated in that behalf by the Government of Nepal,
                    by obtaining, through diplomatic channel, consent of,
                    and in cooperation with, the competent authority of the
                    country where the offence was committed,

             (c)    In cases where any investigation cannot be conducted
                    pursuant to clause (a) or (b), investigation conducted by
                    the competent investigating officer of the country where
                    the offence was committed,




                                                                           39
            (d)    In cases where even the circumstance referred to in
                   clause (c) does not exist, investigation conducted by the
                   investigating authority of the area where the accused
                   was apprehended or of the area of his or her permanent
                   abode if the accused is not apprehended.

            (2)    If the report of or documents related to the investigation
      conducted pursuant to sub-section (1) has been executed in any
      language other than the Nepali language, authentic Nepali translation
      of such documents shall be submitted to the court.

            (3)    If it appears from the investigation conducted pursuant
      to sub-section (1) that a case has to be filed against any person, the
      concerned government attorney shall frame a charge sheet and file
      the case in the court in accordance with this Chapter.

31.   Investigation report to be sent: (1) After      the      completion   of
      investigation made into any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2,
      the investigating authority shall prepare an investigation report, in
      the form referred to in Schedule-19, accompanied by the originals
      and duplicates of the documents, and exhibits and evidence
      contained in the case-file, setting out under which law any or all of
      the persons suspected of committing the offence shall be punishable
      if it appears that there is sufficient evidence to make indictment
      against such accused, and setting out the relevant matter if it appears
      that the offence has not been committed or in spite of the
      commission of the offence, the accused cannot be traced out or that
      there is no sufficient evidence to make indictment against any
      accused, and send such report to the concerned government attorney
      office.



                                                                            40
       (2)   The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be sent at
least fifteen days in advance of the expiry of the statute of limitation
under the relevant law in relation to a case not involving a detainee,
and normally three days in advance of the day for filing a case, also
having regard to the time required to make decision of whether or
not to institute the case and the time required for preparing a charge
sheet and filing it in the court, in relation to a case involving a
detainee.

       (3)   Upon receipt of the case-file, together with the
investigation report pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned
government attorney office shall study the case-file, evaluate the
proofs and evidence collected in the course of investigation, and send
it to the Attorney General for decision to or not to institute the case.

       Provided that where the Attorney General has delegated his or
her power to decide to or not to institute the case to the subordinate
officer, such case-file shall be sent to the concerned officer.

       Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"subordinate officer" means the government attorneys under the
Attorney General, and this term also includes, unless otherwise
provided in the Constitution, any such officer or employee of the
Government of Nepal as authorized by the Attorney General to
institute any other case involving the Government of Nepal as the
plaintiff.

       (4)   If, in studying a case-file in connection with making
decision of whether or not to institute a case pursuant to sub-section
(3), the government attorney deems it necessary to collect further
proof and evidence or conduct further investigation or make further


                                                                       41
interrogation with any person, the government attorney may direct
the investigating authority to collect such proof and evidence or
conduct such further investigation or make interrogation with such
person and send the same.

       (5)   If the government attorney gives direction to conduct
further investigation into the offence pursuant to sub-section (4), the
investigating authority shall complete further investigation within
fifteen days of the date of receipt of such direction.

       (6)   If the investigating authority thinks that further
investigation referred to in sub-section (5) cannot be completed
within the time specified in that sub-section and any person is held in
detention, the investigating authority may release such person on
recognizance, with or without taking guarantee undertaken by a
reliable person.

       (7)   If the investigating authority submits a report,
accompanied by the reason, to the government attorney under this
Section that a case cannot be instituted against any person, and any
person is held in detention in the course of investigation, the
investigating authority shall keep holding such person in detention
until the government attorney makes decision to or not to institute
the case.

       (8)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, where decision has been made not to institute a case on any
offence set forth in Schedule-1 because of the absence of evidence
but any significant evidence is obtained subsequently, investigation
into such offence may be conducted again and the charge sheet may
be filed.


                                                                    42
                                  Chapter-3

                     Prosecution and Filing of Cases

32.   To file charge sheets: (1) If, on studying a case-file in the course of
      making decision to or not to institute a case pursuant to sub-section
      (3) of Section 31, and in view of the proof and evidence collected,
      the concerned government attorney considers that there is adequate
      evidence for instituting the case, the concerned government attorney
      shall, in relation to a case under Schedule-1 or 2, prepare a charge-
      sheet, setting out the following matters, in the form referred to in
      Schedule-20 and shall submit the charge sheet to the concerned court
      within the time limit:

            (a)    Full   name,    surname,   address,   description,    age,
                   occupation or business of the accused,

            (b)    Name of the father, mother, husband or wife of the
                   accused,

            (c)    Village Body or Municipality where the accused is
                   residing, ward number, village, street, block number, if
                   available,

            (d)    Description setting out the actual identity of the
                   accused, his or her photograph, duplicate copies of his
                   or her citizenship or passport, driving licence or other
                   document indicating his or her actual introduction,

            (e)    Biometrics of pointing fingers of both hands of the
                   accused,




                                                                          43
      (f)    If the accused is staying in a rented house, details
             including the name, surname and address of the house
             owner,

      (g)    The contents of the information related to the offence,

      (h)    The particulars of the offence,

      (i)    The details of exhibits and evidence in substantiation of
             the commission of the offence by the accused,

      (j)    The charge made against the accused, and the grounds
             thereof and reasons therefor,

      (k)    The relevant laws to be applied, and the reasons
             therefor,

      (l)    The demand for punishment to be imposed on the
             accused, and the reasons therefor,

      (m)    The amount of compensation, if any, required to be
             awarded to the person who has sustained injury from the
             offence,

      (n)    Particulars of other necessary matters, if any, related to
             the nature of the offence.

      (2)    A charge sheet to be submitted pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall be accompanied by the proofs, evidence, exhibits and
objects collected in connection with the offence, and the accused if
held in detention.

      (3)    If the law gives any specific name to the offence alleged
to have been committed by the accused, the charge sheet to be




                                                                    44
submitted pursuant to sub-section (1) shall mention that name in
connection with such offence.

      (4)    If the law in force does not give any name to the offence
pursuant to sub-section (3), name shall be so given to the offence,
also having regard to the elements of the offence according to the
nature of the offence, that the accused can clearly understand the
charge made against him or her.

      (5)    If information is received that the accused has already
been sentenced for any offence or the accused should be liable to
enhanced punishment by the reason that the accused has also been
previously convicted of any offence, the charge sheet filed pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall also mention the date of previous conviction
of the accused, the name of the court awarding the punishment and
the case or if such matter is discovered later, it shall be mentioned as
and when so discovered.

      (6)    If the government attorney makes decision not to
institute a case against any person in connection with any offence
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 31 owing to the fact that the
evidence and proof collected for the time being in connection with
that offence are not sufficient enough to institute the case against that
person, and if such offence also involves a matter of civil liability
related to the loss of and damage to the personal property or amount
of any person, the government attorney shall give information
thereof to the informant or the victim of such offence, through the
concerned investigating authority.

      (7)    If, upon receipt of information referred to in sub-section
(6), the concerned person may, notwithstanding anything contained


                                                                      45
in the law in force, file a case, if he or she so wishes, within sixty
days of the date of receipt of such notice, as if it were an offence
under Schedule-4.

      (8)    If a case is instituted only against any person out of
more than one person subjected to investigation pursuant to this Act
or if investigation has been conducted as if it were a state case and
the investigation discloses that such case cannot be instituted as a
state case pursuant to this Act but can be instituted under other Act
and decision is made to that effect or such case can be instituted as
an individual case, the concerned government attorney shall
immediately send information thereof to the concerned High Court
Government Attorney Office and Office of Attorney General.

      (9)    Upon receipt of the information pursuant to sub-section
(8), the High Court Government Attorney Office shall study such
matter and decide to or not to institute the case, and if there appears a
reasonable reason for instituting the case, it shall give direction,
accompanied by the reasons therefor, to the concerned government
attorney to institute the case; and upon receipt of such direction, such
government attorney shall file a charge sheet or supplementary
charge sheet and institute the case against those persons whom the
case was not instituted against.

      (10) If the High Court Government Attorney Office decides
not to institute the case pursuant to sub-section (9), it shall give
information thereof to the Office of Attorney General.

      (11) Upon receipt of the information under sub-section (10),
the Office of Attorney General shall be give necessary direction to




                                                                      46
      the concerned government attorney as to whether or not to institute
      the case.

            (12) If information is received under sub-section (8) that case
      can be instituted under other law and such content is found
      reasonable, the High Court Government Attorney Office shall give
      information thereof to the concerned person.

            (13) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, where a
      bail/bond or guarantee has been taken from any person in the course
      of investigation and, upon investigation, decision is made not to
      institute the case against him or her, the bail/bond or guarantee so
      furnished shall be returned to such person.

33.   Filing of charge sheet claiming for lesser punishment: (1)
      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the
      accused of any offence assists the investigating authority in the
      course of conducting investigation into such offence, the
      investigating authority may, in consideration for such assistance,
      recommend to the government attorney for a reduction in the
      sentence than can be imposed on such accused under the law.

            (2)    If a recommendation is received pursuant to sub-section
      (2), the government attorney may, also having regard to such
      recommendation, file a charge sheet with conditional claims, with a
      proposal for a reduction in the sentence that can be imposed on the
      accused.

            (3)    In filing a charge sheet pursuant to sub-section (2), the
      government attorney may file the charge sheet proposing for a
      reduction in the sentence as follows:




                                                                         47
            (a)    If the accused pleaded guilty of the offence in
                   whole, before the investigating authority or
                   prosecuting authority, a reduction of a maximum
                   of twenty-five percent of the sentence that can be
                   imposed on the accused,

            (b)    If the accused pleaded guilty of the offence in
                   which he or she was also involved and assisted in
                   revealing detailed facts as to the offence and the
                   other offenders or gang involved in the offence or
                   the principal giving direction to commit the
                   offence or in arresting the persons involved in the
                   offence or, in the case of any organized offence
                   or offence committed in a group, in locating the
                   other persons involved in that offence or the place
                   where criminal conspiracy of such offence was
                   made, in seizing or forfeiting any motor vehicle,
                   machine, equipment or other object or arms used
                   for the commission of such offence, a reduction
                   of a maximum of fifty percent of the sentence that
                   can be imposed on the accused.

      (4)   In order to make a pray for the reduction in the sentence
under sub-section (2), the documents contained in the case-file of the
concerned case shall clearly demonstrate that such accused has
rendered such assistance.

      (5)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a pray cannot be made for the reduction in the sentence in
any of the following offences or circumstances:



                                                                   48
            (a)    If the accused has once availed of the facility under this
                   Section,

            (b)    If the accused was sentenced to imprisonment, a period
                   of three years has not lapsed after the service of such
                   sentence,

            (c)    If the accused has already been sentenced for the same
                   offence in which he or she is accused of.

            (6)    If, after the filing of a charge sheet praying for a
      reduction in the sentence pursuant to sub-section (2), the accused
      makes before the court a deposition that is different from the
      deposition which he or she has made before the investigating
      authority or the government attorney or furnishes hostile evidence or
      denies committing the offence or does not assist in judicial
      proceedings, such accused shall not be entitled to get the facility
      referred to in this Section.

            (7)    In the case referred to in sub-section (6), the
      government attorney shall revoke the reduction of sentence proposed
      pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2) and make a petition to the court
      praying for additional sentence, and such petition shall be an integral
      part of the same charge sheet.

34.   Cases on minor offences of specific type may not be filed: (1) If it
      appears that it is not practicable to file a case on any minor offence
      of any specific type or it does not substantially affect public interests,
      the government attorney may, with the approval of the Attorney
      General, decide not to file a case against such person.




                                                                             49
      (2)    Prior to making decision pursuant to sub-section (1), the
government attorney shall cause a bond to be executed by such
accused undertaking not to repeat such offence in the future.

      (3)    For the purposes of this Section, the words "minor
offence of specific type" means any of the following offences:

             (a)   Offence related to pickpocketing involving the
                   claimed amount of less than one thousand rupees,
                   committed for the first time,

             (b)   Offence of begging committed for the first time,

             (c)   Any other offence punishable by a sentence of a
                   fine not exceeding three thousand rupees or of
                   imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month
                   or both the sentences, committed for the first
                   time.

      (4)    Prior to making decision not to institute a case pursuant
to this Section, the government attorney shall forfeit the claimed
amount of the offence.

      (5)    The claimed amount forfeited pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall be provided to the person, if any, victimized from the
offence and, failing such victim, to the victim relief fund established
under law.

      (6)    If a case is not filed pursuant to sub-section (1) and such
person commits any offence under this Act within three years from
such date, such person shall be liable to the sentence to which the
sentence that can be imposed on him or her for the previous offence
shall also be added.



                                                                     50
            (7)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if the government attorney makes decision not to institute a
      case, the victim party who is not satisfied with such decision may file
      a case on his or her own behalf.

            (8)    If decision is made not to institute a case pursuant to
      sub-section (7), a notice thereof shall be given to the victim
      immediately; and, for that purpose, the statute of limitation under
      law shall be deemed to commence from the date of receipt of the
      notice of such decision.

             (9)   The concerned government attorney shall provide
      copies of the documents related to the investigation conducted
      pursuant to this Chapter to the person who files a case pursuant to
      sub-section (7).

35.   Additional claim can be made: If, based on the other relevant
      additional evidence found after a case has already been filed in the
      court, it appears necessary to make a charge also against other
      accused in that case, in addition to the accused against whom the
      case has already been filed, or to make additional charge against the
      person who has already been made accused upon the filing of the
      case, the government attorney may, setting out the reasons therefor,
      cause further investigation to be conducted, and file a case, making
      additional claim against the other additional accused also.

36.   Alterations in charge sheets: (1) If, by the reason that additional
      evidence has been discovered in any case already filed in the court, it
      appears necessary to alter the charge made previously in that case,
      the concerned government attorney may, with the permission of the
      Attorney General, make a petition, accompanied by the reasons


                                                                          51
      therefor, to the concerned court of first instance for alteration in the
      charge sheet.

            (2)       Upon receipt of such petition, the concerned court may,
      if the contents thereof appear to be reasonable, give order to alter the
      claim in the charge sheet in accordance with the petition.

            Provided that an order to make such alteration shall be made
      before the concerned court of first instance passes judgment.

37.   Power to make order to correct minor errors: (1) If it is required
      to correct minor errors in a charge sheet of a case filed in the court,
      the concerned government attorney may make a petition,
      accompanied by the reason therefor, to the concerned District Court.

            (2)    If, upon examination of the petition made pursuant to
      sub-section (1), it appears reasonable to correct the errors, the court
      may make order for the correction of such errors.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
      "minor errors" means any typo, typing or printing related errors in
      the name, surname, age or address of the accused.

38.   Custody of exhibits, evidence and accused: (1) In submitting a
      case-file, along with the investigation report, to the government
      attorney for prosecution, the investigating authority shall have the
      custody of the exhibits, evidence connected with the offence and the
      accused and shall, if the concerned government attorney so orders,
      produce the same before the concerned court at the same time.

            (2)    Except as provided in sub-section (1), the concerned
      police office shall, consequent upon the filing of a case in the court
      pursuant to this Chapter, produce before the concerned government



                                                                           52
      attorney office the additional proof, evidence, object, document or
      exhibit, if any, discovered in connection with the case, and such
      government     attorney   office    shall,   upon   making    necessary
      examination, submit such document, exhibit or evidence to the court.

39.   To retain safely: (1) If the government attorney makes decision not
      to institute a case pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 31, he or she
      shall, as promptly as possible, return the exhibit, evidence and thing
      including the case-file to the concerned police office.

            (2)    The concerned police office shall safely retain the case-
      file, exhibit, evidence and thing received pursuant to sub-section (1)
      until the statute of limitation for instituting the case on such offence
      expires.

            (3)    If the exhibit, evidence or thing referred to in sub-
      section (1) is a property of any one, the police office shall return
      such property to its owner, upon having a deed executed by him or
      her with a bond to submit such property to the investigating authority
      or court as and when so required.

40.   Copy or information to be given: (1) The government attorney
      shall give the concerned investigating authority and the accused a
      copy of the decision, if any, made by him or her not to institute the
      case pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 31 and a copy of the
      charge sheet, if he or she has made decision to institute the case.

            (2)    If, in any case under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, the
      concerned government attorney makes decision to the effect that the
      evidence is not sufficient enough to institute the case, he or she shall
      give information of such decision to the concerned investigating




                                                                            53
      authority and the authority or office higher in level than such
      investigating authority.

41.   Notice to be given to informants or victims: If decision is made
      not to institute a case in connection with any offence pursuant to sub-
      section (3) of Section 31, the investigating authority shall, as soon as
      possible, give information thereof, accompanied by the reason
      therefor, to the informant or victim.

42.   Concerned person to be made party: (1) If, while proceeding with
      a case, in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff, filed under this
      Act, it seems that the case does not fall under Schedule-1 or
      Schedule-2 but any other case may be instituted in accordance with
      law, the court shall make order to that effect and give information
      thereof to the concerned person.

               (2)   If the concerned person agrees to take over/continue the
      case within two months from the date of receiving such information,
      that person shall be treated as the plaintiff and the case proceeded
      and adjudicated, based on the case-file of the same case in
      accordance with law.

43.   Filing of cases: (1) The following authority or person may file the
      following case required to be filed under this Act in the concerned
      court:

               (a)   The concerned government attorney, in relation to a
                     case related to any offence under Schedule-1 or
                     Schedule-2, in the form of a charge sheet,

               (b)   The Government of Nepal, constitutional body, court or
                     any public authority, in relation to a case related to any



                                                                            54
                  offence under Schedule-3, in the form of a compliant or
                  report,

            (c)   The concerned person or one who has locus standi to
                  file case, in relation to a case related to any offence
                  under Schedule-4, in the form of a plaint.

            (2)   If a case is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), such case
      shall be deemed to have been filed under this Act.

44.   Exemption from sentence for making allegation or complaint: (1)
      No person shall be liable to sentence for making any allegation or
      complaint in connection with any case under Schedule-1, Schedule-2
      or Schedule-3.

            (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if, after the case has been instituted in the court consequent upon
      investigation into the case based on the allegation or complaint made
      by any person, standing as a witness and showing any matter,
      evidence or proof to the belief of the Government of Nepal, police
      employee or other authority, such matter, evidence or proof turns out
      to be false or fabricated on the basis of a report, complaint or
      deposition made by any person or the deposition of any witness or
      informant or any other ground, the court may examine the evidence
      from the same case-file and do the following:

            (a)   To sentence the witness who has made a false statement
                  or fabricated deposition to imprisonment for a term not
                  exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five
                  thousand rupees or both the sentences,




                                                                        55
              Provided   that   such   sentence    of   fine   or
      imprisonment shall not exceed half the sentence that
      may be imposed on the offender.

(b)   In the event of the court being of the opinion that the
      informant has made such false allegation or produced
      false   or   fabricated   evidence   being    guided     by
      premeditation or jealousy without the existence of any
      reasonable ground for making the allegation, to cause a
      reasonable compensation, in view of the nature and
      circumstance of the case, to be paid by such witness to
      the defendant to be acquitted, in relation to the same
      case.

              Provided that if such person furnishes a
      reasonable reason for the report or witness made by him
      or her to be prejudicial, no compensation shall be
      awarded.




                                                               56
                                 Chapter-4

                         Jurisdiction of Court

45.   Offences to be tried by court having jurisdiction over area where
      offences committed: The power to proceed and adjudicate any case
      related to any offence shall be vested in the court having jurisdiction
      over the area where such offence is committed.

            Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in accordance
      with law, constitute a separate criminal court or criminal bench in
      any district for the proceeding and adjudication of such cases.

46.   Offences connected with different areas to be tried by court
      having jurisdiction over any of such areas: In the following
      circumstances, a court having jurisdiction over any area may proceed
      and adjudicate the case:

            (a)    If any act constituting the offence is done partly in one
                   area and partly in another, by a court having jurisdiction
                   over any of such areas,

            (b)    If any act is done in one area and the offence arises in
                   another area as the consequence of such act, by a court
                   having jurisdiction over any of such areas,

            (c)    If different offences take place in different areas from
                   the same event, by a court having jurisdiction over any
                   of such areas where any of such offences takes place,

            (d)    If an offence is committed in several areas but it cannot
                   be determined in which area the act constituting the
                   offence has been completed, by a court having
                   jurisdiction over any of such areas,


                                                                           57
(e)   In the case of any offence related to kidnapping or
      hostage-taking, by a court having jurisdiction over
      either the area where such offence is committed or the
      area where the kidnapped person or hostage is held,
      concealed or detained,

(f)   If the offence is one committed by or against any person
      performing a journey or one committed in relation to
      any goods being transported from one place to another,
      by a court having jurisdiction over either the area where
      the offence begins or the area where such person visits
      in the course of journey or the area where such goods
      are seized or traverse,

(g)   If the preparation or criminal conspiracy of any offence
      is made in one area but the act constituting that offence
      is accomplished in another area, by any court having
      jurisdiction over either the area where such preparation
      or conspiracy is made or the area where the act
      constituting such offence is accomplished,

(h)   If any offence is committed by means of any letter or
      other communication or information technology, by any
      court having jurisdiction over either the area where such
      letter, communication or information was sent from or
      the area where the same was received,

(i)   If an offence is committed along the boundary between
      two countries, by the court adjoining to such boarder,




                                                               58
                   Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, the term
                   "boarder" includes the no-man's land along the
                   boundary between two countries.

            (j)    In the case of an offence related to property, by the
                   court having jurisdiction over either the area where such
                   offence is committed or the area where the property
                   earned from the offence is concealed, purchased, sold or
                   otherwise exchanged,

            (k)    In the case of any case related to any offence over
                   which universal jurisdiction can be exercised by virtue
                   of any law or any treaty to which Nepal or the
                   Government of Nepal is a party, by such court as
                   designated by the Government of Nepal.

47.   Jurisdiction to try offences committed outside Nepal: If the law in
      force provides for punishment in respect of any offence committed
      outside Nepal or on an aircraft or ship registered in Nepal, such
      offence shall be proceeded and adjudicated by the court of the
      district where the person accused of such offence is found and by the
      District Court of the area where such accused has permanent abode,
      if such accused is not found.

48.   Proceeding and adjudication of cases filed in two courts or
      bodies: (1) Where a case related to any offence, falling under the
      jurisdiction of more than one court, is filed in more than one court,
      the case on such offence shall be proceeded and adjudicated by the
      court in which it has been filed earlier, and, where the case has been
      filed on the same day, by the court designated by the court hearing
      appeals from such court where the courts are under the jurisdiction of


                                                                         59
      the same appeal hearing court, and by the court designated by the
      Supreme Court where the courts are under the jurisdiction of the
      different appeal hearing courts.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      where a case related to any one offence, falling under the jurisdiction
      of the court and a quasi-judicial body, is filed in the court and the
      quasi-judicial body, such case shall be proceeded and adjudicated by
      the court.

            (3)    Where a case is one which falls under the jurisdiction of
      courts or judicial bodies of different types, the case shall be
      proceeded and adjudicated by the respective court or body competent
      under law, even if it is liable to joint proceedings under sub-section
      (1), and clause (a) or (c) of sub-section (2), of Section 54. .

49.   Cases under jurisdiction of both higher and lower courts to be
      tried by higher court: If a case related to an offence falls under the
      jurisdiction of both the higher and the lower courts pursuant to the
      law in force or if a case related to a person or offence which is liable
      to joint proceeding under Section 54, being under the jurisdiction of
      both the higher and the lower courts, can be so filed or has been filed
      in such courts, the higher court shall have power to try such case.

50.   Endorsement to be made in cases of lacking jurisdiction or
      failing to meet requirements: (1) If, it appears to the court, from
      the contents of any charge sheet or complaint made to it, that the
      court is not competent to proceed and adjudicate the case complained
      or that the complaint does not meet the requirements, the court shall
      make an endorsement to that effect in that charge sheet or complaint.




                                                                            60
               (2)   In the case of a complaint which is endorsed pursuant to
      sub-section (1) by the reason of the lack of jurisdiction, where the
      day on which such endorsement is made is the deadline of the statute
      of limitation, the proper court shall, notwithstanding anything
      contained in the law in force, register the complaint in accordance
      with law if it is made not later than fifteen days after that day
      excluding the time required for journey.

51.   Decision as to jurisdiction and statute of limitation to be made:
      (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, where
      the accused, in making statement in relation to any case, or the
      defendant, in filing a memorandum of defence, raises a question that
      the court lacks jurisdiction or the statute of limitation has expired,
      the court shall initiate other proceedings in such case only after
      deciding such question, and if the case does not appear to fall under
      its jurisdiction, the court shall order that it be presented to the proper
      court.

               (2)   A petition may be made to the appeal hearing court
      against the decision made pursuant to sub-section (1), not later than
      thirty-five days of the date of such decision.

               (3)   A question settled pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2)
      shall not be raised again in the appeal hearing court.

               Provided that this provision shall not apply to an interlocutory
      order made in the course of proceeding of the case.




                                                                             61
                                 Chapter-5

       Provisions Relating to Preliminary Proceedings of Cases

52.   Commencement of proceedings by the court upon filing of cases:
      (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the court shall
      commence proceedings in a case related to any offence upon its
      filing in the court pursuant to this Chapter.

            Provided that:

            (a)    On an offence of disregarding a court order or contempt
                   of court in any other manner, the court can proceed the
                   case even upon taking a summary statement or written
                   explanation of the accused or upon any other petition or
                   report,

            (b)    Where, in examining evidence in a case by the court,
                   any party makes deposition alleging that any evidence is
                   a forged or fraudulent one, the case may, on the basis of
                   that deposition, be proceeded on the offence of fraud or
                   forgery or on the offence of aid and abetment, making
                   criminal conspiracy or accomplice to such offence, from
                   the same case-file.

            (2)    Except in cases where the proceedings of case have
      commenced, pursuant to clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1),
      on the charge of committing any offence referred to in Section 81 or
      82 of Chapter-3, Sections 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 97, 98 or 100 of
      Chapter-4, of Part-2 of the Penal Code, or abetment of, criminal
      conspiracy to, or being accomplice to, any such offence, the court
      may, if it thinks justifiable to institute the case on the basis of a



                                                                         62
petition, report, deposition or any separate complaint, proceed the
case by executing a memorandum of order, accompanied by the
reason therefor.

       (3)    Any case set forth in sub-section (2) shall be proceeded
and adjudicated in conjunction with the case of the main offence.

       (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, except with the written approval of the Government of
Nepal or departmental head, no case shall be instituted accusing any
employee of the Government of Nepal of any offence alleged to have
been committed by such employee while acting in the discharge of
his or her official duty.

       Provided that if any employee commits any offence by doing
any act beyond his or her official duty, approval of the Government
of Nepal or departmental head shall not be required to institute a case
on such offence alleged to have been committed by him or her.

       (5)    No case may be instituted against any person on any of
the offences under Schedule-1 and Schedule-2, without filing a
charge sheet by the government attorney.

       (6)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5),
the following person may make a separate complaint for the
reparation of any injury resulted from any offence:

       (a)    A person who has suffered injury from the offence,

       (b)    In the case of any matter requiring compliant by a
              public servant who is deputed elsewhere or abroad in
              the course of his or her employment, any of his or her
              immediate successors,



                                                                    63
            (c)    In relation to any act or thing required to be done or
                   preserved by any person by virtue of any post, office or
                   any other capacity, the person holding such post, office
                   or capacity,

            (d)    In relation to any matter in which a person with
                   disability, child or person over seventy-five years of age
                   or person who is physically or mentally incompetent is
                   entitled to make complaint, his or her successor living
                   in the joint family and, failing such successor, any other
                   successor or guardian,

            (e)    In relation to any offence involving any body corporate,
                   the director, member, administrator or chief executive
                   officer who is authorized to act as the chief of such
                   body.

53.   Complaint may be made: (1) Except as otherwise provided in this
      Act, the following person may file a complaint in relation to any
      offence in the court:

            (a)    A person who has suffered injury from the offence,

            (b)    In the case of any matter requiring compliant by a
                   public servant who is deputed elsewhere or abroad in
                   the course of his or her employment, any of his or her
                   immediate successors,

            (c)    In relation to any act or thing required to be done or
                   preserved by any person by virtue of any post, office or
                   any other capacity, the person holding such post, office
                   or capacity,



                                                                          64
      (d)   In relation to any matter in which a person with speech
            or visual impairment, child or person over seventy-five
            years of age or person who is physically or mentally
            incompetent is entitled to make complaint, his or her
            successor living in the joint family and, failing such
            successor, any other successor or guardian,

      (e)   In relation to any offence involving any body corporate,
            the director, member, administrator or chief executive
            officer who is authorized to act as the chief of such
            body.

      (2)   A complaint referred to in sub-section (1) shall state the
following matters and be in the form referred to in Schedule-21:

      (a)   The name, surname, address (including the street),
            description, age, occupation or business of the accused,
            the name of his or her father, mother, husband or wife,

      (b)    The citizenship, passport, driving license of the accused
            or his or her other descriptions that could enable to find
            him or her easily,

      (c)   The Village Body or Municipality where the accused is
            residing or staying, ward number, village, street, block
            number, if available, and other descriptions of the
            accused to the extent of availability,

      (d)   If the accused is staying in a rented house, the name,
            surname and address of the house owner, to the extent
            of availability,




                                                                   65
      (e)   If the accused has no permanent abode, the name,
            surname and address of the owner of house where the
            accused is staying,

      (f)   The particulars related to the offence,

      (g)   Where the offender has committed more than one
            offence at the same time, each count of charge made
            against him or her, and evidence related thereto,

      (h)   The relevant law to be applied, and the reason for the
            same,

      (i)   The sentence demanded to be imposed on the accused,
            and the ground for the same,

      (j)   The     injury   caused    from   the     offence,   and   if
            compensation has to be recovered from the accused, the
            amount of such compensation and the ground for the
            same,

      (k)   Other necessary matters.

      (3)   Any complaint referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
accompanied by such number of copies of the complaint as that of
the accused and one copy each of the documentary evidences
intended to be produced by the complainant.

      Provided that it is not required to submit copies of the
complaint and documentary evidences in a case in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff.




                                                                       66
54.   Cases can be instituted together: (1) A case may be instituted
      against the following persons upon the same charge sheet, report,
      complaint, plaint or memorandum of order:

            (a)   Persons who commit the same offence or different
                  offences on the same occasion,

            (b)   Persons who commit one or more than one offence
                  jointly or in connivance with each other,

            (c)   Persons who commit various offences related to each
                  other.

            (2)   In the case of the persons involved in the following
      offence, a case may be instituted upon the same charge sheet, report,
      complaint, plaint or memorandum of order:

            (a)   Attempt, criminal conspiracy to commit, or abetment of,
                  the offence,

            (b)   Accomplice to the offence,

            (c)   Offence of possessing, buying, selling, giving or taking
                  any thing acquired from the offence,

            (d)   Offence of possessing, buying, selling, giving or taking
                  any thing with the intention of committing the offence, or

            (e)   Offence of hiding any person connected with the
                  offence or aiding such person to abscond.

55.   Separate complaint to be made in relation to each offence or
      accused: Except as otherwise provided in Sections 53 and 54, a
      separate charge sheet, complaint or memorandum of order shall be
      framed or made in relation to each offence or accused.



                                                                          67
56.   Government of Nepal to be made as plaintiff: A case related to
      any of the offences under Schedule-1 and Schedule 2, other than a
      case instituted upon a complaint referred to in sub-section (2) of
      Section 52, shall be proceeded by making the Government of Nepal
      as the plaintiff.




                                                                     68
                                Chapter-6

                    Warrant for Arrest and Summons

57.   Summons or warrant for arrest to be issued: (1) After                a
      complaint has been made pursuant to this Act, the court shall, subject
      to this Chapter, issue a summons or warrant for arrest, as required, to
      enforce the appearance of any accused who is not present along with
      the complaint in a case related to an offence set forth in Schedule-1
      and Schedule- 2.

            (2)    The court shall, pursuant to sub-section (1), issue a
      warrant for arrest to enforce the appearance of the accused of the
      following offence:

            (a)    A heinous or grave offence,

            (b)    An offence of attempt to, abetment of, or criminal
                   conspiracy to, or being accomplice to, any offence set
                   forth in clause (a) or offence of hiding the accused of
                   such offence or aiding such accused to abscond.

            (3)    The court may, as required, issue a summons to enforce
      the appearance of the accused of any offence other than that referred
      to in sub-section (2).

            Provided that if the court has a reasonable reason to believe
      that the accused has absconded and his or her arrest is unlikely or the
      accused fails to appear before the court within the time limit
      specified in the summons, the court may issue a warrant for arrest
      pursuant to sub-section (2), in the case of such accused.

            (4)    The court may issue a warrant for arrest to arrest and
      produce any person who is bound to produce any document, exhibit


                                                                          69
      or evidence required to be produced before the court if there is a
      reasonable reason to believe that such person is likely to conceal or
      destruct such document, exhibit or evidence or such person fails to
      produce such document, exhibit or evidence before the court within
      the time limit specified in the summons issued pursuant to sub-
      section (3).

               (5)   With the issuance of a warrant for arrest pursuant to
      sub-section (4), the court may order any employee or police officer
      to search the place where the document, exhibit or evidence referred
      to in that Section is kept and produce such document, exhibit or
      evidence before the court.

               (6)   The employee or police officer referred to in sub-section
      (5) shall search any place in accordance with Section 18.

               (7)   A summons or warrant for arrest to be issued by the
      court under this Section to enforce the appearance of any accused
      shall be accompanied by a notice, in the form referred to in
      Schedule-22, indicating, inter alia, the contents of the complaint.

58.   Procedure for issuing warrant for arrest: (1) A warrant for arrest
      to be issued by the court pursuant to this Chapter shall clearly state
      the full name and address of the person to be arrested and the reason
      for arrest and be in the form referred to in Schedule-23 in the case of
      an accused person and in the form referred to in Schedule-24 in the
      case of a witness and other person.

               (2)   A warrant for arrest issued pursuant to sub-section (1)
      shall be signed by the concerned authority and bear the seal of the
      court.




                                                                            70
      (3)     While issuing a warrant for arrest pursuant to sub-
section (1), the warrant for arrest shall be directed to the police office
of the area where the person to be arrested is or likely to be residing
or staying.

      Provided that the court may, if it deems so necessary, also
direct a warrant for arrest to the employee of the court.

      (4)     A warrant for arrest issued pursuant to this Section shall
remain valid unless and until it is executed or canceled by the court.

      (5)     A person to whom a warrant for arrest has been issued
may be arrested pursuant to such warrant, and while arresting a
person in pursuance thereof, the warrant for arrest shall be shown to,
and the notice sent pursuant to sub-section (7) of Section 57 shall
also be delivered to, that person.

      (6)     A person who has been arrested under a warrant for
arrest shall immediately be produced before the concerned court as
soon as possible but not later than twenty-four hours, excluding the
time required for journey.

      (7)     If the person to be arrested under a warrant for arrest is
not found within seven days after the date of receipt by the police of
the warrant for arrest, the concerned police office shall continue to
search that person, and, subsequent thereto, proceed to his or her
house and deliver the 35-day-warrant for arrest issued to him or her,
in the form referred to in Schedule-25, to any of his or her family
member of legal age, residing jointly with him or her, and retain a
receipt thereof in the case-file.




                                                                       71
       (8)    If the person referred to in sub-section (7) refuses to
acknowledge such warrant or is not found, a copy of the warrant
shall be affixed to his or her house in presence of a member of the
concerned ward committee of the Local Level, and if such member is
not available, in presence of at least two local persons, and one copy
thereof shall be delivered to the court.

       (9)    A copy of the warrant affixed to the house where the
concerned person is residing or staying pursuant to sub-section (8)
shall also be delivered to the concerned ward office of the Local
Level and a receipt of its acknowledgement shall be retained in the
case-file.

       (10) If a warrant is delivered to it pursuant to sub-section (9),
the concerned ward office of the Local Level shall, upon receipt of
such warrant, give information thereof to the concerned person and
also affix it to its notice board.

       (11) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a person under the warrant for arrest appears himself or
herself before the court prior to being arrested, he or she shall be
arrested and hearing shall be held under law as to whether or not he
or she has to be held in detention, and the warrant for arrest issued to
him or her previously shall be voided and information thereof given
to the concerned authority.

       (12) If the court comes to know upon a petition by the party
or through any other means that the person under the warrant for
arrest is staying in any district other than his or her address, the court
may also direct the warrant for arrest to the district where he or she is
staying.


                                                                       72
      (13) If any accused does not appear within the time limit
specified in the warrant for arrest issued pursuant to this Chapter and
remains absconded or the actual address of the accused cannot be
discovered or the place where the accused is staying cannot be found
out, the court may publish a notice, containing the description of
such accused, in any national daily newspaper and affix the notice to
the notice board of the concerned court.

      (14) Upon the publication of a notice pursuant to sub-section
(13), the accused shall be deemed to have duly received the notice,
and any police office or employee may, at any time, arrest and
produce him or her.

      (15) The court may, at any time after the affixation of the
notice pursuant to sub-section (8), order the attachment of any
property belonging to the person under the warrant for arrest.

      (16) If an order for the attachment of property is made
pursuant to sub-section (15), the court shall affix a notice of such
attachment to its notice board and give information thereof to the
concerned Land Revenue Office or other body or organization.

      (17) If it receives a precept from the court for the attachment
of property pursuant to such-section (16), the concerned Land
Revenue Office or other body or organization shall immediately
attach such property and give information thereof to the court
making such attachment order.

      (18) If a property attachment order is made by the court
pursuant to sub-section (15), such property shall, notwithstanding




                                                                    73
      anything contained in the law in force, be deemed to have been
      attached with effect from the date of such order.

            (19) After the person to be arrested pursuant to this Chapter
      appears in the court, the court shall, irrespective of the stage of the
      proceeding of the case, order the concerned Land Revenue Office or
      other body or organization to immediately release the property of
      such person which has been attached pursuant to this Section.

59.   Procedure for issuing summons: (1) While issuing a summons to
      an accused person pursuant to this Act, the court shall issue it,
      specifying the date for making appearance in the court.

            (2)    The summons referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
      issued to the accused, in the form referred to in Schedule-26, at least
      fifteen days before the date specified for his or her appearance, if it is
      a case other than one under Schedule-4, and in the form referred to in
      Schedule-27, giving a time-limit of fifteen days if the case is related
      to an offence set forth in Schedule-4.

            (3)     Where a summons has not been served at least fifteen
      days in advance of the time-limit specified pursuant to sub-section
      (2) for making appearance but has been served prior to the time-limit
      specified for making appearance, and the accused is unable to appear
      on the date specified, the accused may make a petition to the court,
      accompanied by the reason for failure to so appear, within fifteen
      days of the service of the summons, for the specification of another
      time-limit for making appearance.

            (4)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
      court may so specify another date for his or her appearance that such




                                                                             74
date falls within a period not exceeding fifteen days from the date of
such petition.

      (5)    In the case of an accused who does not appear within
the time-limit specified in the summons served pursuant to this
Section, the court may, if it considers necessary to have the accused
arrested and produced before it, issue a warrant for arrest pursuant to
the proviso to sub-section (3) of Section of 57.

      Provided that if the accused makes a petition showing that he
or she was not able to appear within the specified time-limit due to a
force majeure event and the court holds the contents of such petition
to be reasonable, the court may order the extension of the time-limit
for a period not exceeding fifteen days, after the termination of the
period of existence of the force majeure event, excluding the time
required for journey.

      Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, the term "period of
existence of the force majeure event" means the following period:

      (a)    If a person required to appear before the court had to
             observe obsequies or mourning on his or her own
             according to his or her tradition, at the demise of any
             one of him or her, a period of seven days, excluding the
             time required for journey, after the date on which a
             period of fifteen days of the death of such person
             elapsed,

      (b)    If a person required to appear before the court is a
             woman and delivered a child, a period of sixty days




                                                                    75
      from the date of delivery, excluding the time required
      for journey,

(c)   If the route remained closed due to flood, landslide or
      snow-fall or means of public transportation did not ply
      due to declaration of curfew or any other reason during
      the time-limit specified for appearance before the court,
      a period of fifteen days, excluding the time required for
      journey, from the date of resumption of such route or
      means of public transportation,

(d)   If there occurred a calamity such as earthquake or
      volcano eruption during the time-limit specified for
      appearance before the court, a period of ten days,
      excluding the time required for journey, from the date of
      occurrence of such calamity,

(e)   If a person required to appear before the court was
      kidnapped or taken into hostage by any one, a period of
      fifteen days, excluding the time required for journey,
      from the date of being released from such kidnapping or
      hostage-taking,

(f)   If a person required to appear before the court, because
      of being unconscious or unable to make movement or
      seriously ill because of any accident, and thereby being
      unable to appear within the time-limit specified for the
      same, was admitted to a hospital recognized by the
      Government of Nepal for treatment, a period until he or
      she is discharged from the hospital, not exceeding
      fifteen days in the case of a party to a case under


                                                            76
                   Schdule-4 and not exceeding three months in the case of
                   a party to any other case.

             (6)   In the circumstances referred to in clauses (a) and (e) of
      sub-section (5), the concerned person shall, as far as possible, give a
      notice thereof to the court immediately.

60.   Summons may be issued in the name of witness: In issuing a
      summons in the name of a witness pursuant to this Act, the court
      shall issue the summons, stating the necessary matters, in the form
      referred to in Schedule-28.

61.   Service of summons: (1) The court shall issue a summons in
      triplicate, and the service of summons shall be executed by any
      police employee, any employee of the court or any such other
      government office as the court may direct.

            (2)    A summons issued pursuant to this Act shall, to the
      extent possible, be served personally on the person summoned, by
      delivering it to him or her.

            (3)    Where the person summoned cannot be found, or,
      despite being found, refuses to acknowledge the summons being
      served pursuant to sub-section (2), the summons may be delivered to
      any of his or her joint family members, who has completed at least
      eighteen years of age.

            (4)    If the concerned person or joint family member is not
      found or, despite being found, such person or even such member
      refuses to acknowledge the summons pursuant to such-section (3),
      the serving employee shall affix one of the duplicates of the
      summons to the house or house-door of that person in the presence



                                                                          77
of one member of the concerned ward of the Local Level and of at
least two local persons, who as well as the serving employee shall
affix signature or thumb impression thereon, and deliver one copy
thereof to the concerned ward committee of the concerned Local
Level and submit one copy of the served summons to the court.

      (5)    The concerned ward office of the Local Level shall affix
to its notice board a notice corresponding to the summons received
pursuant to sub-section (4).

      (6)    If at least two local persons and at least one member of
the concerned ward committee of the Local Level certify that the
person summoned pursuant to sub-section (5) does not reside in the
place specified in the summons, the summons shall be returned to the
court, indicating the address of his or her residence, if any,
discovered, and indicating the matter to that effect if such address
cannot be discovered.

      (7)    If a summons is returned pursuant to sub-section (6), the
court may direct the summons to the place of his or her residence
and, as required, issue another summons setting out the address, as
required, in consultation also with the plaintiff.

      (8)    While serving a summons on any office-bearer or
employee of the Government of Nepal or any body corporate, the
summons may be served at the office where such office-bearer or
employee is serving.

      (9)    Where a summons is received for service pursuant to
sub-section (8), the chief of such office or body available for the time
being shall serve the summons by delivering one copy of the




                                                                     78
summons to the concerned office-bearer or employee, and, as far as
practicable, cause the other copy to be signed by the concerned
office-bearer or employee, stating the manner and date of its service,
and return that copy to the court.

      (10) If a summons cannot be served pursuant to sub-section
(9), such summons shall be affixed to the notice board of the
concerned office or body. A report on such affixation to the notice
board shall be given to the concerned court.

      (11) If, in serving a summons pursuant to sub-section (8),
such officer-bearer or employee is on leave, the concerned office or
body shall promptly give a notice of such service of summons to
such employee.

      (12) If a summons is to be served on any body corporate, a
copy of the summons shall be delivered to the central or local office
of such body, and the receipt thereof shall be submitted to the court.

      (13) If a summons is served at the local office pursuant to
sub-section (12), the summons shall be deemed to have been served
at the headquarters of such body.

      (14) In serving a summons pursuant to this Section, the
serving employee shall submit to the court a report containing the
date and details of the service.

      (15) If any court is required to serve a summons on a person
who is residing in any area outside its jurisdiction, the court shall
send the summons to the court of that area and cause it to be served
through that court, and that court shall cause the summons to be




                                                                     79
      served in accordance with this Chapter and return a copy thereof to
      the court issuing the summons.

            (16) In serving a summons pursuant to this Section, the
      notice sent to the accused person pursuant to sub-section (7) of
      Section 57 shall also be delivered or, depending on the situation,
      affixed to the house-door, together with the summons.

62.   Summons       may    be    served    through     print    or   electronic
      communication media: (1) If any summons cannot be served
      pursuant to Section 61, the court may serve the summons by
      publishing the contents of such summons in such national daily
      newspaper or broadcasting through electronic communication media
      as owned by the Government of Nepal.

            (2)    If a summons is published or broadcast pursuant to sub-
      section (1), the summons shall be deemed to have been duly served.

63.   Service of arrest for warrant: (1) The court shall issue a warrant
      for arrest in triplicate, and the warrant for arrest shall, if practicable,
      be served personally on the person warranted.

            (2)    The person warranted shall acknowledge the warrant for
      arrest issued pursuant to sub-section (1)

            (3)    If the person warranted cannot be found to serve the
      warrant for warrant being served pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      warrant may be delivered to any of his or her joint family members
      who has completed at least eighteen years of age.

            (4)    If the concerned person or any joint family member is
      not found pursuant to sub-section (3) or, despite being found, such
      person or family member refuses to acknowledge the warrant, the



                                                                              80
serving employee shall affix one of the duplicates of the warrant to
the house-door of that person in the presence of a member of the
concerned ward of the Local Level and of at least two local persons,
who as well as the serving employee shall affix signature or thumb
impression thereon, and deliver one copy thereof to the concerned
ward office of the Local Level and submit one copy of the served
warrant for arrest to the court.

      (5)    The concerned ward committee of the Local Level shall
affix to its notice board a notice corresponding to the warrant for
arrest received pursuant to sub-section (4).

      (6)    If at least two local persons and at least one member of
the concerned ward committee of the Local Level certify that the
person to be arrested pursuant to the warrant for arrest issued under
sub-section (5) does not reside in the place specified in the warrant,
the warrant for arrest shall be returned to the court, indicating the
address of his or her residence, if any, discovered, and indicating the
matter to that effect if such address cannot be discovered.

      (7)    If a warrant for arrest is returned pursuant to sub-section
(6), the court may direct the warrant for arrest to the place of his or
her residence and, as required, issue another warrant for arrest setting
out the address, as required, in consultation also with the plaintiff.

      (8)    In serving a warrant for arrest pursuant to this Section,
the serving employee shall submit to the court a report containing the
date and details of the service.

      (9)    If any court is required to serve a warrant for arrest on a
person who is residing in any area outside its jurisdiction, the court




                                                                         81
      shall send the warrant for arrest to the court of that area and cause it
      to be served through that court, and that court shall cause the warrant
      for arrest to be served in accordance with this Chapter and return a
      copy thereof to the court issuing it.

            (10) If an employee making a report referred to in sub-
      section (8) makes a report setting out the reason for not being able to
      effect the service of a warrant for arrest in pursuance of the
      procedures set forth in this Section, the warrant for arrest issued to
      the concerned person may, notwithstanding anything contained
      elsewhere in this Section, be served by publishing the warrant in a
      national daily newspaper owned by the Government of Nepal, and
      the warrant for arrest so served shall be deemed to have been duly
      served.

            (11) In serving a warrant for arrest, the notice sent to the
      accused person pursuant to sub-section (7) of Section 57 shall also be
      delivered or, depending on the situation, affixed to the house-door of
      him or her, together with the warrant for arrest.

64.   Warrant for arrest or summons may be issued to or served on
      accused residing in foreign country: (1) Notwithstanding anything
      contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a warrant for arrest is to be
      issued to or a summons is to be served on a person who is accused of
      an offence sub judice in any court and staying or residing in a foreign
      country, the warrant for arrest or summons may be issued to or
      served on such person in accordance with the law in force on mutual
      legal assistance.




                                                                           82
             (2)   If the Government of Nepal receives information as to
      the service of a warrant for arrest or summons issued pursuant to
      sub-section (1), it shall give such information to the concerned court.

             (3)   If a warrant for arrest or summons issued pursuant to
      sub-section (1) cannot be served, such warrant or summons may be
      served by publishing it in such national daily newspaper as owned by
      the Government of Nepal or broadcasting it through electronic
      communication media.

             (4)   If a warrant for arrest is issued or summons served
      pursuant to sub-section (1), such warrant or summons shall be
      deemed to have been duly issued or served in accordance with this
      Act.

             (5)   If a warrant for arrest is issued pursuant to sub-section
      (1) and the police of the concerned country arrests and hands over
      the accused to any police office, the accused shall be produced
      before the concerned court as soon as possible but not later than
      twenty-four hours, excluding the time required for journey.

             (6)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, nothing shall prevent the institution of proceeding and
      adjudication of a case by the reason only that the warrant for arrest or
      summons could not be issued to or served on any person staying or
      residing in a foreign country, in accordance with this Section.

65.   Special provisions relating to absconding persons: (1) In the case
      of a person against whom a warrant for arrest has been issued
      pursuant to this Chapter but who is not arrested because of not being
      found or in the case of a person who is absconding and failing to




                                                                           83
appear before the court, the following matters shall be dealt with as
follows, with effect from the following day of the expiry of thirty
days after the date of issuance of such warrant to the day on which
he or she appears before the court:

      (a)    If such person is an incumbent office-bearer or
             employee      of   the   Government    of   Nepal,   State
             Government, Local Level, constitutional body or any
             government office, a body corporate, educational or
             academic institution under full or partial ownership or
             control of the Government of Nepal, State Government,
             Local Level, or any other public body, he or she shall be
             deemed to have ipso facto been suspended from his or
             her office,

      (b)    If an attachment to the property belonging to such
             person has not been effected pursuant to sub-section
             (15) of Section 58, the attachment of the immovable
             property belonging to him or her shall be effected
             pursuant to that sub-section,

      (c)    If it is required to renew any industry, trade or business
             or income tax registration firm, license, industry etc.
             held in the name of, or under sole ownership of, such
             person, the act of renewal shall automatically be
             withheld,

      (d)    Transaction on securities held in the name of such
             person shall ipso facto be withheld,




                                                                    84
(e)   Facilities such as salary, allowance, gratuity and
      pension receivable by such person in accordance with
      law shall be deemed to have ipso facto been withheld,

(f)   Any interest, royalty or facility to be acquired by such
      person from any intellectual property right such as a
      patent, design, trademark and copyright shall be
      considered to have ipso facto been withheld,

(g)   If any bank account held in the name of such person is
      known, and a request is made to withhold the
      transaction of such account, such bank account shall be
      considered to have ipso facto been withheld,

(h)   If it is so requested not to provide a citizenship
      certificate, passport or land ownership registration
      certificate to such person in accordance with law, the
      concerned body shall not provide the citizenship
      certificate, passport or land ownership certificate to him
      or her,

(i)   If it is known that such person is staying or residing
      outside Nepal, the extradition proceeding may be
      initiated if such person can be extradited under a treaty
      to which the Government of Nepal is a party or under
      the law in force, and failing such circumstance, in view
      of the gravity of the offence, a request may be made
      through the diplomatic channel to the concerned country
      or relevant international organization to arrest such
      person.




                                                              85
                (2)   The court shall give a notice thereof to the concerned
      authority or body in order to make effective the provisions referred
      to in sub-section (1).

66.   Process may be served at court: (1) Notwithstanding anything
      contained elsewhere in this Chapter, any process or notice issued by
      any court to the following person may, in the following
      circumstance, be served by delivering it to such person at the court
      itself:

                      (a)   In the case of an employee or office-bearer of the
                            concerned court, at the time when he or she
                            makes attendance in the court,

                      (b)   In the case of a party who is remanded on
                            recognizance in another case in the concerned
                            court, at the time when the party appears on the
                            appointed date for appearance,

                      (c)   In the case of an attorney who represents any
                            party in any case in the concerned court, at the
                            time when the attorney appears for such
                            representation,

                      (d)   In the case of a law practitioner who appears in
                            the concerned court in the course of law practice,
                            at the time when he or she appears in the course
                            of such practice, or

                      (e)   In the case of a person who appears as a witness,
                            at the time when he or she appears in that
                            capacity.



                                                                           86
       (2)    If a process or notice issued by the court in the name of
any person referred to in sub-section (1) is tendered for delivery
when the person appears in the concerned court, the person shall
receive it.

       (3)    If any person refuses to acknowledge such process or
notice tendered for delivery pursuant to sub-section (2), the process
server shall give a report thereof to the concerned court immediately.

       (4)    If the content of the report made pursuant to sub-section
(3) seems to be reasonable, the court shall make an order to prevent
such person from representing a party, receiving the appointed date
for appearance in capacity of an attorney, doing law practice or
making deposition in the capacity of witness in the court until he or
she acknowledges such process or notice.




                                                                    87
                                  Chapter-7

         Provisions Relating to Detention, Bail and Guarantee

67.   To hold the accused in detention: (1) If, based on the evidence
      available for the time being, any person accused of the following
      offence appears to be guilty of the offence or there is any reasonable
      ground, based on such evidence, to believe that such person is guilty
      of the offence, the court may remand such person in detention for
      trial, recording the reason for such detention:

                   (a)    Any offence punishable by the sentence of
                          imprisonment for life,

                   (b)    Any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2
                          which    is    punishable     by   a   sentence   of
                          imprisonment for a term exceeding three years, or

                   (c)    An offence of attempt to, abetment of, or criminal
                          conspiracy to, or being accomplice to, the offence
                          set forth in clause (a) or (b).

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      the court may, in any of the following circumstances, remand such
      accused in detention for trial as may be punishable by a sentence of
      imprisonment in accordance with law:

                   (a)    If the accused pleads guilt of the charge made
                          against him or her before the court,

                   (b)    If the accused charged with an offence punishable
                          by a sentence of imprisonment for a term of one
                          year or more has no permanent abode in Nepal
                          and there is a possibility that the accused might


                                                                            88
                         abscond      and   might   not   be   apprehended
                         subsequently if he or she is not remanded in
                         detention,

                   (c)   If the accused, being default in          making
                         appearance within the time-limit in pursuance of
                         the warrant for arrest issued pursuant to sub-
                         section (1) of Section 58, has been arrested and
                         produced accordingly, and fails to show any
                         satisfactory reason for being unable to appear in
                         the court,

                   (d)   If the accused was convicted of an offence and
                         sentenced to imprisonment within the period of
                         three years immediately before this instant charge
                         against him or her.

             (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
      or (2), the court may, in relation to an offence other than that
      punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding ten
      years, remand on bail/bond or guarantee any accused who is a child
      or infirm due to physical or mental disease or woman with pregnancy
      of more than seven months or the aged above seventy-five years of
      age.

68.   Bail /bond, guarantee or bank guarantee to be taken from the
      accused: (1) Except in the case referred to in Section 67, the court
      may ask for a bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee from the
      accused if there exists a reasonable ground for proving the charge
      against the accused.




                                                                        89
            Provided that the bank guarantee shall be unconditional and
      renewable at such times as may be specified by the court.

            (2)    The court shall remand in detention any accused who
      fails to furnish bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee pursuant to
      sub-section (1).

69.   To remand on recognizance: The case shall be tried by remanding
      the accused on recognizance to appear on appointed days when the
      accused appears in the court, in any case other than that referred to in
      Sections 67 and 68.

70.   Additional bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee may be
      demanded: (1) If it appears subsequently that the bail/bond,
      guarantee or bank guarantee taken from any accused is insufficient,
      the court may demand additional bail/bond, guarantee or bank
      guarantee from the accused.

            (2)    If the accused fails to furnish such additional bail/bond,
      guarantee or bank guarantee referred to in sub-section (1), the court
      may remand such accused in detention.

71.   Power to remand in detention or on guarantee at any stage of
      proceedings: (1) In the course of examining evidence, the court
      may, irrespective of the stage of the proceedings of a case, and in the
      light of the circumstances of the case, remand the accused in
      detention pursuant to Section 67 or demand a bail/bond, guarantee or
      bank guarantee from the accused pursuant to Section 68; and nothing
      shall be deemed to prevent the court from remanding the accused in
      detention or demanding a bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee
      from the accused subsequently by the reason only that the accused




                                                                           90
      was not remanded in detention or that a bail/bond, guarantee or bank
      guarantee was not taken from him or her earlier.

            (2)   If the court has any reasonable ground to prove that the
      accused remanded in detention pursuant to Section 67 or 68 is not
      guilty of the offence, the court may, irrespective of the stage of
      proceedings of the case, hear such matter and order the release of
      such accused from detention.

72.   Grounds for fixation of amount of bail/bond, guarantee or bank
      guarantee: (1) The amount of a bail/bond, guarantee or bank
      guarantee to be taken pursuant to this Chapter shall be fixed
      reasonably, having regard to the following matters:

                  (a)    Nature and gravity of the offence,

                  (b)    Financial status and family condition of the
                         accused or the offender,

                  (c)    Age and physical condition of the accused or the
                         offender,

                  (d)    Whether he or she was previously convicted of
                         any offence and sentenced for the same or not,

                  (e)    Whether he or she has committed several
                         offences on the same occasion or not,

                  (f)    Sentence imposed or imposable on him or her,
                         and compensation to be borne by him or her,

                  (g)    Consequences resulted from the offence,

                  (h)    Whether he or she has pleaded guilty of the
                         offence or not,



                                                                          91
                   (i)   Where the accused is a helpless or infirm person
                         or pregnant woman or woman accompanying a
                         baby whom she breast feeds.

             (2)   If any party to a case makes a petition to the appeal
      hearing court showing the reason that the amount of a bail/bond,
      guarantee or bank guarantee demanded from any person under this
      Act is lesser or excessive and is not thus reasonable, such court may
      hear the matter and order the alteration or modification in the amount
      of such bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee.

73.   Petition may be made to appeal hearing court: A person who is
      not satisfied with the order of detention, bail/bond, guarantee or bank
      guarantee made pursuant to this Chapter may make a petition to the
      court hearing appeal up to one level.

            Provided that in relation to a question as to the illegality of the
      order of detention made in a case involving an offence punishable by
      a sentence of imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of
      five years or more, a petition may also be made to the court hearing
      appeal more than one level.

74.   Deed to be executed while taking bail/bond, guarantee or bank
      guarantee: (1) While taking a bail/bond from any person under this
      Chapter, the court shall cause a deed to be executed by such person
      in the form referred to in Schedule-29, containing the condition that
      the amount of bail/bond shall be forfeited if such person fails to
      appear at the time and place specified by the court.

            (2)    While taking a guarantee or bank guarantee pursuant to
      this Act, the court shall fix the amount of guarantee and take security
      of property equal to such amount.


                                                                            92
            (3)    If a person required to furnish a guarantee furnishes the
      security of his or her property, the court shall cause a deed to be
      executed by such person in the form referred to in Schedule-30
      containing the condition that the amount of guarantee shall be
      recovered from the property so furnished as security or from any
      other property belonging to him or her if he or she fails to appear at
      such time and place as specified by the court.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
      "guarantee" also includes a bank guarantee.

            (4)    If any other person furnishes his or her property as a
      guarantee for the person who is required to furnish guarantee
      pursuant to this Chapter, the court shall cause a separate deed to be
      executed by that person in the form referred to in Schedule-31
      containing the condition that if that person fails to make the accused
      appear at such place and time as specified by the court, the amount
      of that guarantee shall be recovered from the property so furnished as
      guarantee or from any other property belonging to that person.

            (5)    If the value of the property furnished as guarantee
      pursuant to this Section decreases subsequently for any reason, the
      person who has furnished such guarantee shall submit a property
      equal to the decreased value to the court.

75.   Forfeiture of bail/bond: (1) If a person who has furnished a
      bail/bond pursuant to this Chapter fails to appear in the court, the
      bail/bond furnished by him or her shall be forfeited.

            (2)    If any immovable property has been furnished as a
      bail/bond pursuant to sub-section (1), the property equal to the




                                                                         93
      amount to be paid by such person shall be sold or recovered and the
      rest property shall be returned to him or her.

76.   Amount of bail/bond may be returned and guarantee released:
      (1) If the court remands the accused in detention pursuant to this
      Chapter in a case filed in the court, the bail/bond or guarantee
      furnished by him or her before detention shall be released.

            (2)      Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the bail/bond
      or guarantee taken by the court from any accused in the course of the
      proceedings of the case shall be immediately returned or released to
      the accused if the accused is ultimately adjudged to be acquitted of
      the offence.

77.   To release from detention where case not adjudged within
      specified period: (1) If the case cannot be adjudicated within one
      year from the first date fixed for the examination of evidence in
      relation to any accused remanded in detention for trial pursuant to
      this Chapter and if such accused is still held in detention, the case
      may be proceeded and adjudicated by remanding such accused on
      bail/bond or guarantee.

            Provided that:

                     (a)   This Section shall not apply to any person who is
                           accused of an offence punishable by a sentence of
                           imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term
                           of ten years or more if such person is held in
                           detention pursuant to Section 67.

                     (b)   The court may, if it thinks reasonable, proceed
                           the case by remanding a recidivist in detention.



                                                                              94
            (2) If any court issues order to release any accused pursuant to
      sub-section (1), it shall give information thereof to the appeal hearing
      court not later than three days after the issue of such release order.

78.   Maximum allowable period of detention: Notwithstanding
      anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, no accused shall be
      held in detention for a period exceeding the maximum term of the
      sentence of imprisonment than can be imposed on him or her if the
      charge made against him or her is proved.

79.   Memorandum of order to be executed: While remanding any
      accused in detention, releasing any accused held in detention or
      taking a bail/bond or guarantee from any accused or modifying or
      altering such bail/bond or guarantee pursuant to this Chapter or
      releasing from detention pursuant to Section 77, the court shall
      execute a memorandum of order to that effect, accompanied by the
      reason for the same.

80.   Warrant for detention to be given: While holding any person in
      detention for any reason whatsoever pursuant to this Act, the
      competent authority shall hold such person in detention by giving a
      warrant for detention in the form referred to in Schedule-32,
      accompanied by the reason therefor and legal ground of such
      detention, to that person pursuant to an order for detention made
      pursuant to this Chapter.




                                                                               95
                                Chapter-8

                  Provisions Relating to Appointed Date

81.   Appointment of date for appearance by assigning reason: (1) A
      court shall, in so doing, appoint the date for appearance upon
      specifying each proceeding required to be conducted in the presence
      of parties to a case and the proceeding to be carried out on each
      appointed date for appearance.

            (2)    The proceeding specified pursuant to sub-section (1)
      shall be carried out on the appointed date.

            Provided that if the specified proceeding cannot be conducted
      for any reason on the appointed date for appearance, the court may
      execute a memorandum of order, assigning the reason therefor, and
      appoint another date for appearance.

            (3)    In a case to which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff
      or defendant, the court shall give the concerned government attorney
      office a notice of such date for hearing or proceeding of the case as
      appointed pursuant to sub-section (1).

82.   Book of, and receipt of acknowledgment of, appointed date for
      appearance: (1) The court shall maintain one book of appointed
      date for appearance or a separate book for each case division, as
      required, in the form referred to in Schedule-33.

            (2)    The concerned employee shall mention in the book of
      appointed date for appearance maintained pursuant to sub-section (1)
      the date appointed for appearance and the purpose for which that
      date is so appointed and signed it, cause the parties to the case who
      are present to affix signature or thumb impression on it, and maintain



                                                                         96
      a receipt of acknowledgement of the date for appearance in the form
      referred to in Schedule-34, to be recorded in the case-file.

            (3)    If any party does not appear in the court on the date
      appointed for appearance pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned
      employee shall record that matter in the book of appointed date for
      appearance, and sign it.

            (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, the Government of Nepal shall not be required to be on
      recognizance in a case in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff.

83.   Sheet of appointed date for appearance: (1) The court shall give a
      sheet of appointed date for appearance to the parties to each case in
      the form referred to in Schedule-35.

            (2) The concerned employee shall state the date appointed for
      appearance and the purpose for which that date is so appointed in the
      sheet referred to in sub-section (1), and sign it.

84.   Appointment of date for appearance to be made in a manner to
      be convenient to parties: (1) While appointing a date for
      appearance for any purpose in a case, the court shall appoint such
      date, as far as practicable, taking into consideration of whether it
      would be convenient to the parties to the case and the specified
      purpose could be accomplished or not.

            (2)    While appointing a date for appearance pursuant to sub-
      section (1), it shall be appointed in accordance with the schedule of
      business specified in relation to the proceedings of the case.




                                                                        97
85.   To appear on appointed date for appearance: (1) Where a date is
      appointed by the court for appearance for any proceeding, the
      accused or defendant shall appear in the court on that appointed date
      for appearance.

             Provided that if any party to a case makes a petition showing
      the reason for being unable to appear in the court on the appointed
      date for appearance, and the court holds such reason to be
      reasonable, the court may order the extension of the expired
      appointed date for appearance for a maximum period of fifteen days,
      at one time or several times not exceeding two times, excluding the
      time required for journey.

             (2)       Where a person required to appear in the court on the
      appointed date for appearance pursuant to sub-section (1) has been
      held in detention or imprisoned in any manner whatsoever, the
      person shall send information of that matter to the concerned court
      through the prison in which he or she is so held in detention or
      imprisoned.

             (3)       If information is given pursuant to sub-section (2), such
      person shall not be deemed to have expired the appointed date for
      appearance during the period of such detention or imprisonment.

             (4)       If any person who is held in detention or imprisoned
      gives information thereof to the court pursuant to sub-section (2), the
      court may order the concerned prison to produce that person at the
      time of trial.

86.   Consequences of absence of parties on appointed date for
      appearance: (1) If the plaintiff does not appear on the date




                                                                             98
appointed for trial and proceeding in any case related to an offence
under Schedule-4, the court shall appoint another date for appearance
in estimation of the time-limit that can be extended by him or her
pursuant to the proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 85.

      (2)    If the party to a case appears on or before the other date
as appointed for appearance pursuant to sub-section (1) and makes a
petition subject to the proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 59,
showing a reasonable reason for being unable to appear on the
previous appointed date owing to a force majeure event, the court
shall extend the appointed date for appearance of him or her and
adjudicate the case in accordance with law.

      (3)    If the party to a case does not appear in the court on the
other date appointed for appearance pursuant to sub-section (1) and it
appears or is held from the evidence contained in the case-file that
the defendant has admitted the plaintiff's claims in whole or in part,
the court shall adjudicate the case by making judgment to such
extent, and dismissing it to the extent that the claims which do not
appear or are not held to be admitted by the defendant.

      Provided that where the plaintiff is in attendance but the
defendant is absent, the court shall adjudge the case accordingly, by
examining all proofs and evidence adduced by the plaintiff and the
defendant.

       (4)   Even though the accused or defendant does not appear
in the court subsequent to a deposition or statement of defense made
in the court pursuant to this Act, the court may proceed and
adjudicate the case in accordance with law.




                                                                    99
87.   Power to issue warrant for arrest and attach property: (1)
      Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 86, if any accused
      has failed to appear on the previous appointed date for appearance,
      the court may, if it is of the opinion that the accused should be
      arrested and produced before it, issue a warrant for his or her arrest
      pursuant to Section 58 and order the arrest of, and attachment of the
      property of, such accused.

             (2)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      concerned police employee shall arrest the accused, and the
      concerned Land Revenue Office or other body or organization shall
      attach the property of the accused, in pursuance of such order.

88.   Remaining on recognizance after examination of evidence not
      necessary: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if any party does not wish to remain on recognizance after
      the examination of evidence, the party may make a petition to the
      court for a leave to that effect.

             (2)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and the
      court does not consider necessary to keep him or her on
      recognizance, it may discontinue his or her recognizance.




                                                                         100
                                 Chapter-9

                     Provisions Relating to Attorney

89.   Attorney may be appointed: (1) If any party to a case is unable to
      appear in person to file a complaint, memorandum of appeal or
      statement of defense, submit evidence, recover the claimed amount,
      compensation or any other thing in pursuance of judgment or do any
      other necessary act pertaining to the case, that party may appoint an
      attorney on his or her behalf, setting out the reason for the same.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      no attorney may be appointed in the following circumstance:

                   (a)    If the case relates to any offence under Schedule-
                          1 or Schedule-2,

                   (b)    If the accused who is required to make deposition
                          pursuant to this Act has to appear personally in
                          the court to make such deposition,

                   (c)    If the accused is required to be on remand
                          pursuant to this Act or is a person who is
                          remanded in detention as a consequence of his or
                          her failure to furnish such bail/bond or guarantee
                          as demanded to be furnished by him or her,

                   (d)    If the court so thinks necessary on any reasonable
                          ground and orders the party to a case to appear
                          personally in the court despite the circumstance
                          that an attorney is already or may be appointed,

                   (e)    Except where a person who is a foreign national
                          or whose nationality is not known is in detention


                                                                            101
                    or has already furnished a bail/bond or guarantee,
                    if such person fails to furnish a bail/bond or
                    guarantee of an amount equivalent to the sentence
                    which can be imposed on him or her upon
                    judgment in the case in accordance with law,

             (f)    If there is any penalty, fine, ten percent fee, five
                    percent fee imposed pursuant to a court order is
                    due and payable, upon the party being default in
                    payment of the same,

             (g)    If the court, showing any reasonable reason to do
                    so, has passed an order disallowing the party to
                    appoint an attorney.

      (3)    If any person appoints an attorney in contravention of
sub-section (2), the court shall void such attorney.

      (4)    Any person having the following qualification may be
appointed as an attorney:

             (a)    Being competent to make contract under the law
                    in force,

             (b)    Not having been sentenced for forgery, fraud,
                    corruption   or   any     other    criminal   offence
                    involving moral turpitude,

                            Provided that nothing contained in this
                    clause shall prevent any party to a case from
                    appointing any of his or her joint family relatives
                    as his or her attorney.




                                                                     102
            (c)    No government claimed amount pursuant to any
                   decision or fee, court fee, penalty or fine payable
                   to the court in the execution of judgment being
                   due and payable.

      (5)   In appointing an attorney pursuant to sub-section (1), a
power of attorney shall be executed in the form referred to in
Schedule-36, stating the following matters:

            (a)    Subject matter of the case,

            (b)    Full name, surname, address including street, and
                   age of the person to be appointed as attorney, his
                   or her citizenship number and district of issue of
                   citizenship certificate,

            (c)    Matter that the person to be appointed as attorney
                   does not suffer any disqualification referred to in
                   sub-section (4),

            (d)    Matter that any penalty, fine, ten percent fee and
                   five percent fee imposed pursuant to a court order
                   is not due and payable,

            (e)    The act authorized to be done by the attorney.

      (6)   A power of attorney shall be witnessed by at least two
persons.

      (7)   A power of attorney shall bear signature or thumb
impression of the party appointing the attorney and the witnesses.




                                                                     103
90.   Person may become attorney of more than one person
      simultaneously: A person may become an attorney of more than one
      person simultaneously.

            Provided that a person who is an attorney of a party to a case
      shall not also become an attorney of the opposite party to the same
      case or a case related to that case.

91.   Party may be attorney: In any case involving more than one
      plaintiff or defendant, any one of them may be appointed as an
      attorney.

            Provided that an attorney of one party to a case shall not also
      become attorney of the opposite party to the same case.

92.   Powers and duties of attorney: (1) An attorney may carry out any
      acts set forth in the power of attorney on behalf of the party
      appointing him or her.

            (2)    If the court makes order to cause the appearance of the
      person appointing attorney in person, the attorney shall cause such
      person to make appearance in the court.

            (3)    If the concerned person fails to appear pursuant to sub-
      section (2), the court may void the attorney of such person.

93.   Revocation of attorney: (1) If a party who has appointed an attorney
      wishes to revoke the power of attorney executed by him or her, the
      party may, at any time, revoke the power of attorney and carry out
      acts pertaining to the case in person or appoint another person as his
      or her attorney.

            (2)    In the event of the revocation of the power of attorney
      and carrying out of acts pertaining to the case by a party in person,


                                                                        104
      the concerned party shall give information thereof through petition to
      the court.

94.   Not to arrest attorney: No attorney shall be arrested for any
      sentence imposed on, or liability to be borne by, the party upon
      passing judgment in the case.

95.   Special provision relating to permission to appoint attorney: (1)
      Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of sub-section (2)
      of Section 89, a person in the following circumstance may make a
      petition, setting out the matter, to the court for permission to appoint
      an attorney:

                     (a)   If a person accused of an offence punishable by a
                           sentence of imprisonment for a term of three
                           years or less is not held in detention and there
                           arises a circumstance where he or she cannot
                           appear on the appointed date for appearance
                           because of a force majeure event,

                     (b)   If a woman accused of an offence punishable by a
                           sentence of imprisonment for a term not
                           exceeding five years cannot appear in the court
                           on the appointed date for appearance because of
                           her delivery or any other reason.

            (2)      If, upon a petition made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      court considers its contents to be reasonable, it may, assigning the
      reasons to be recorded, grant permission to him or her to appoint an
      attorney, with or without specifying the period, subject to the other
      provisions contained in this Chapter.




                                                                          105
                                  Chapter-10

      Provisions Relating to Transfer and Adjournment of Cases

96.   Power to transfer cases: (1) The Supreme Court may, if there exists
      a circumstance referred to in clause (1) of Article 134 of the
      Constitution of Nepal, procure a case sub-judice in any High Court
      from such Court, and proceed, hear and adjudicate it.

             (2)    The Supreme Court may, if there exists a circumstance
      referred to in clause (2) of Article 134 of the Constitution of Nepal,
      make an order that a case sub-judice in one High Court be
      transferred to, and heard and adjudicated by, another High Court.

             (3)    The High Court may, if there exists a circumstance
      referred to in clause (2) of Article 145 of the Constitution of Nepal,
      make an order that a case sub-judice in one District Court under its
      jurisdiction be transferred to, and heard and adjudicated by, another
      District Court under its jurisdiction.

             (4)    Decision as to whether the circumstance requiring the
      transfer of the case referred to in sub-section (2) or (3) exists or not
      shall be made on the basis of a petition by the concerned party to a
      case or information from the inspection or report of the court.

             (5)    If there is some reason that any case filed in any court
      cannot be heard by the judge of that court pursuant to this Act, the
      concerned court shall submit a report, setting out such matter, to the
      appeal hearing court, and upon receipt of such report, the appeal
      hearing court may, also considering the convenience of the parties,
      transfer such case to another court of equal jurisdiction that is
      subordinate to its territorial jurisdiction.



                                                                          106
            (6)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), such
      court shall, in accordance with the order of the Supreme Court,
      proceed, hear and adjudicate the case.

            (7)    Even if any case is adjudicated by another court
      pursuant to sub-section (2), (3) or (5), appeal from the judgment
      made by such court shall lie in the court hearing appeal from the
      court where the plaint has been registered originally.

97.   Power to adjourn cases: (1) If any party to a case, out of the several
      cases filed in the several courts, makes a petition to the concerned
      court, showing a reasonable reason that the adjudication of one case
      cannot be, or ought not to be, made until any other case is
      adjudicated, or that judgment of one case will have substantial effect
      on the judgment of any other case or if it realizes that matter, on its
      own initiative, in the course of proceedings, the court may, for the
      reasons to be recorded, order that such case be adjourned.

            (2)    If any court passes an order to adjourn any case filed in
      it pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall adjourn all the
      proceedings of the case, by giving written information thereof to the
      parties to the case, and also give information thereof to the
      concerned court in which another case is filed.

            (3)    Upon receipt of the information referred to in sub-
      section (2), the concerned court shall, upon adjudicating the related
      case filed in it, give information thereof, accompanied by a copy of
      the judgment, to the court adjourning the case within thirty days after
      the date of judgment, and upon receipt of such information, the court
      adjourning the case shall resume the proceedings of the case by




                                                                         107
      giving a written notice thereof to the parties to the case and
      appointing the date for appearance, and hear and adjudicate the case.

               (4)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
      if such parties are also parties to the case referred to in sub-section
      (3), the court adjudging the case shall order them to appear in the
      court adjourning the case not later than fifteen days.

               (5)   If two courts hold divergent views on which of the cases
      filed in such courts should be adjourned, the courts shall send their
      respective report to the appeal hearing court.

               (6)   In the circumstance referred to in sub-section (5), even a
      party to the case may make petition to the concerned appeal hearing
      court.

               (7)   If a report has been sent pursuant to sub-section (5) or a
      petition is made by the party pursuant to sub-section (6), the court
      shall act in accordance with the order of the appeal hearing court, in
      relation to such case.

               (8)   If the court hearing appeal from the two courts holding
      divergent views referred to in sub-section (5) is not the same, such
      matter shall be submitted to the Supreme Court, and it shall be done
      as per the order of the Supreme Court.

               (9)   If the court so deems necessary, it may give notice to
      and hear the concerned parties before adjourning the case or passing
      an order for adjournment pursuant to this Section.

98.   To adjourn case in the event of failure of accused to appear: (1)
      If an accused against whom a warrant for arrest has been issued
      pursuant to Section 57 does not appear or cannot be caused to appear



                                                                           108
before the court even within thirty-five days after the date of the
issuance of the warrant for arrest to the accused, the court shall
adjourn the case in the case of that accused and hear and adjudicate
the case, upon taking and examining evidence, in the case of the
other accused involved in that case.

      Provided that:

             (a)    In the case of an accused who does not appear
                    subsequent to a deposition made in or statement
                    of defense submitted to the court, the case shall
                    not be liable to adjournment, and the court shall
                    adjudicate the case upon taking and examining
                    the proof and evidence adduced by the plaintiff
                    and the defendant and such other evidence as the
                    court thinks reasonable,

             (b)    In relation to a case of offence punishable by a
                    sentence of imprisonment for a term of three
                    years or less, judgment shall be made in that case
                    based on the appreciation of evidence, also in the
                    case of the accused or defendants failing to
                    appear in the court.

       (2)   If any case is to be adjourned pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall postpone all the proceedings of the case.

      (3)    If a case is adjourned pursuant to sub-section (1) and the
accused appears or is caused to appear in the court prior to the
adjudication of the case, the court shall revive the proceeding, give




                                                                   109
information thereof to the complainant and proceed and adjudicate
the case.

      (4)   If an accused does not appear or is not caused to appear
in the court within a period of three years after the date of
adjournment of the case pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall
revive the case so adjourned and proceed and adjudicate it in the case
of such accused.

      (5)   If an accused does not appear or is not caused to appear
in the court even until the period during which the case can be
subject to adjournment pursuant to sub-section (1), the proceeds
acquired from the auction sale, under the law in force, of the
property attached pursuant to sub-section (15) of Section 58 shall,
upon the judgment in that case convicting the accused, be credited to
the consolidated fund of the Government of Nepal.

      (6)   Where an accused appears or is caused to appear in the
court prior to the adjudication of the case and the accused produces
any evidence to the satisfaction of the court that the accused could
not appear by the reason that he or she was ignorant of the case
instituted against him or her, the court shall order that the property
attached be returned to him or her by deducting or realizing the
following expenses:

            (a)    The expenses incurred in attaching the property
                   where it has not yet been sold,

            (b)    The expenses incurred in publishing a public
                   notice for his or her appearance in the court or in




                                                                  110
                    the case of him or her in any matter related to the
                    proceedings of the case.

      (7)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a case filed in a court is adjourned and a report or
information is received that the accused has appeared as a plaintiff or
defendant in any other case filed in the same court or in any other
court, such case shall not be deemed to be adjourned, and the court
may order such accused to appear in the court to proceed such case.

      (8)    Such case may be revived, proceeded and adjudicated,
in spite of the failure of the accused to appear in pursuance of the
order referred to in sub-section (7).




                                                                   111
                                Chapter-11

            Provisions Relating to Examination of Evidence

99.   Evidence to be produced: (1) All of his or her witnesses,
      documents, exhibits and evidences shall be specified in the
      complaint by the plaintiff, in the deposition by the accused, and in
      the statement of defense by the defendant.

            (2)    Such documents, exhibits and evidences specified
      pursuant to sub-section (1) as, by the nature of such documents,
      exhibits or evidences, should be in his or her possession or
      obtainable by him or her shall be produced by the plaintiff with the
      complaint, by the defendant with the statement of defense and by the
      accused while making deposition.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
      or (2), the following provisions shall apply to the following matters:

                   (a)   If the accused, in making deposition, or the
                         defendant, in submitting the statement of defense,
                         makes a request that another date for appearance
                         be appointed for producing any document, exhibit
                         or evidence that cannot be produced immediately,
                         the court may appoint another date for appearance
                         up to a period of one month,

                   (b)   In the case of taking and examining evidence
                         related to the offence of forgery or fraud pursuant
                         to sub-section (3) of the Section 104, the
                         provisions of that Section shall apply,




                                                                          112
                  (c)    If, during the trial of the case, there arises a
                         circumstance requiring the production of any
                         additional evidence in support or rebuttal of any
                         new fact, the concerned party may produce such
                         additional evidence with the permission of the
                         court.

           (4)    Any party to the case shall, in producing any
     documentary evidence pursuant to sub-section (2), submit such
     number of copies of the document as is more by one copy than the
     number of opponents.

           Provided that it shall not be required to submit copies of such
     document in any case under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2.

           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
     “copy” means a photocopy or any other copy of a document.

100. Originals to be returned: (1) If any document is produced before
     the court pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 99, the court shall
     cause its employee to verify whether the copy, submitted pursuant to
     sub-section (4) of the said Section, corresponds to the original or not.

           (2)    The employee making verification pursuant to sub-
     section (1) shall, upon verification, sign each page of the document
     setting down therein that the copy is true according to the original,
     get the party submitting the document to sign the same and
     authenticate it with the seal of the court.

           (3)    After the authentication made pursuant to sub-section
     (2), such employee shall affix the seal of the court on, sign and date,




                                                                         113
      the reverse side of the original, and thereupon return it to the party
      submitting it.

            (4)    If the court so wishes, it may, as required, order the
      concerned party to re-submit the original of a document returned
      pursuant to sub-section (3).

101. Party to cause attendance of witness: (1) The concerned party shall
      cause the attendance of any witness of each case filed in the court on
      the day appointed by the court.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if, in any specific case in which the defendants are in attendance at
      the time when the case is filed, the plaintiff or the defendant or both
      may produce their respective evidence of witness before the court at
      the time of filing of the case.

            (3)    In producing a witness pursuant to sub-section (1) or
      (2), the concerned investigating authority or his or her office shall
      produce the witness of prosecution in any case under Schedule-1 or
      Schedule-2, through the government attorney office.

            (4)    The evidence of a witness who fails to appear on the
      date appointed for appearance for the examination of witness
      pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not be taken into the case.

            Provided that if the witness fails to appear owing to a force
      majeure event and the party makes a petition setting out the matter,
      the court may appoint another date for appearance for the
      examination of such witness.

            (5)    If the process of examination of witness has not begun
      by the reason that all defendants to any case set forth in Schedule-1



                                                                         114
     or Schedule-2 of this Act are not present, any party may, showing
     that the production of witnesses cannot be enforced subsequently if
     they are not produced immediately, request that such witnesses be
     produced immediately and their depositions recorded.

           (6)     If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (5) and such
     reason is reasonable, the court may, assigning the reasons for the
     same, take deposition of such witness immediately.

           (7)     The party and opposite party to a case in attendance
     shall be allowed to make cross-examination of the deposition made
     by the witness pursuant to sub-section (6), and if there does not exist
     such situation, the party in attendance subsequently may make
     rebuttal subsequently only to the extent of the contents of the
     deposition.

102. Examination of expert witness: If an expert who expresses an
     expert opinion in any case related to a heinous or grievous offence in
     which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff dies or has resided
     abroad for a long time and is not able to return to Nepal or it is not
     possible to examine him or her for any other reason, expert opinion
     may be obtained from another expert in the same field who is equal
     to or superior to such expert witness.

103. Cross examination of the co-accused: If, in examining evidence
     pursuant to this Chapter, any co-accused makes accusation against
     another co-accused, such co-accused may make cross-examination to
     the extent of such accusation.

104. Provisions relating to documentary evidence: (1) The court shall
     cause the parties to a case to produce the originals of documentary




                                                                        115
evidence on the date appointed for appearance for examining
evidence and show the document produced by one party to the other.

         (2)   If the other party makes a plea that the document shown
pursuant to sub-section (1) was made by means of forgery or fraud,
the court shall set down such plea and record the deposition of such
party.

         (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if, in the process of showing any documentary evidence produced by
one party to the other party, the other party, mentioning that he or
she is not able to confirm immediately whether such document is
genuine, forged or fraud, makes request for time for that purpose, the
court may, as required, appoint a date for not more than seven days,
and shall give information thereof to the other party, and record the
deposition of that party on that appointed date and also examine the
evidence produced by that party in that connection if that party states
that the document is forged or fraud.

         Provided that in the case of a party who is absent or not
represented on the date appointed for appearance for the examination
of evidence, it shall not be necessary to show the document to, or
record the deposition of, that party pursuant to this Section.

         (4)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
if any party, due to a force majeure event, remains absent on the date
appointed for appearance for confirming whether a document is
genuine or forged, and if the party or his or her representative
appears within fifteen days of the appointment of such date and
wishes to express any matter about that document, such party or




                                                                   116
     representative shall be given an opportunity to make expression
     accordingly.

105. Document named as forged or fraud to be kept in the case-file:
     In the process of showing the original of a document produced by
     one party to the other party pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section
     104, if the other party names it as a forged or fraudulent document,
     the reverse side of such original shall be signed by both the parties,
     by the concerned employee and bear the seal of the court and
     thereupon be sealed and recorded in the case-file safely and if there
     is no space to affix signature or thumb impression, separate paper
     shall be added to the deed with signature or thumb impression at the
     joints.

106. Witness to be examined on fixed day: (1) The deposition of all
     witnesses in attendance on the date appointed for appearance for the
     examination of witness shall be taken; and only where it is not
     possible because of the time factor to complete the taking of the
     deposition of all witnesses in attendance on that day, the deposition
     of such witnesses shall be taken on the next day on which the court
     remains open.

               (2)   Prior to making a deposition by a witness who appears
     to make such deposition pursuant to sub-section (1), the witness shall
     take an oath that he or she will state noting but the truth, in the form
     referred to in Schedule-37 in a manner to be heard by others, and
     such oath shall be recorded in the concerned case-file.

               (3)   The deposition of a witness taken down shall be
     recorded in the form referred to in Schedule-38.




                                                                         117
107. Power to examine witness on commission: (1) Notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a witness is in a
     place outside the jurisdiction of the court in which the case is filed or
     the attendance of such witness cannot be procured for any reason
     and, in view of the gravity of the case, it so appears necessary to
     examine such witness on commission, the court shall give
     information thereof to the parties to the case.

           (2)    If any party to the case so desires, the party may make a
     petition, accompanied by the reasons, to the court that any
     interrogatories which the party wishes to be asked to the witness be
     included in the commission referred to in sub-section (1).

           (3)    If any petition is made pursuant to sub-section (2) and
     the court deems reasonable to have such interrogatories included in a
     commission, it may order that such interrogatories be also included
     in the commission; and the interrogatories of the commission shall
     be framed accordingly.

           (4)    The form of a commission shall be as set forth in
     Schedule-39.

           (5)    If, in examining a witness on commission pursuant to
     sub-section (1), any party to the case so desires, the party may appear
     in the court to which the commission is directed and examine, cross-
     examine or re-examine the said witness in accordance with the
     prevailing law on evidence.

108. Deposition to be taken before bench: (1) The deposition of a
     witness to be taken pursuant to this Act shall be taken before the
     bench of the judge.




                                                                          118
           Provided that while taking the deposition of a witness who is
     unable to appear before the court due to physical infirmity, the judge
     himself or herself may proceed to or send an officer employee
     subordinate to him or her to the place where such witness is residing
     or staying, and the evidence of such witness shall be taken by the
     judge or by such employee in the form of deposition.

           (2)    While so taking the deposition of a witness pursuant to
     sub-section (1), the concerned parties to the case shall be given
     information thereof and also provided with an opportunity to make
     examination pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 107.

109. Witness may be examined through video conference: (1) If it is
     not possible to produce before the court a witness required to be
     examined pursuant to this Chapter because of the witness being
     physically infirm or a child or for security reason, the concerned
     party may, setting out that matter, make a petition to the court for the
     examination of such witness through video conference.

           (2)    If the court makes an order for the examination of any
     specific witness through video conference, the witness shall be
     examined accordingly.

           (3)    If a petition referred to in sub-section (1) is made and
     the reason set forth therein seems to be reasonable or the court makes
     an order pursuant to sub-section (2), the court may, notwithstanding
     anything contained elsewhere in this Act, examine such witness
     through video conference.

           (4)    In making video conference pursuant to sub-section (3),
     the concerned party to the case may, with the permission of the




                                                                         119
     court, appear before such conference room and examine, cross-
     examine or re-examine the witness.

           (5)    In examining a witness pursuant to sub-section (3),
     arrangement shall be made to record the matters expressed by such
     witness, and the court shall maintain records of the video conference.

           (6)    The record of examination of a witness through video
     conference shall be maintained in the form referred to in Schedule-
     40.

110. Demeanor, appearance etc. of witness may be recorded: (1) The
     judge may record such remarks as he or she perceives material
     respecting the demeanor of a witness whilst under examination, and
     such remarks may include how was the behavior and appearance of
     the witness, whether the witness was excited or disappointed while
     answering the questions put to him or her and what the reflection
     was as to the truth or untruth of the replies made by him or her from
     his or her facial expression.

           (2)    The note made pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
     signed by the judge and kept in the case-file.

           (3)    The judge may take into consideration of the note
     referred to in sub-section (1) while making appraisal of the
     deposition of the witness as evidence.

111. Witness once examined not to be re-examined: A witness who has
     once been examined shall not be examined again.

           Provided that if any matter that is essential to be inquired into
     with such witness has been omitted and the judge, assigning the




                                                                        120
     reasons thereof, make an order to that effect, such witness may be
     summoned and examined again.

112. Summons or warrant for arrest may be issued to witness ought
     to be examined: (1) A party to the case may make a petition,
     accompanied by the reasons for the same, that a summons be issued
     to enforce the attendance of any witness who is related with criminal
     case in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff but who does not
     appear on the day appointed by the court for appearance for the
     examination of evidence and the examination of such witness is
     expedient in view of the gravity of the offence or the production of
     any document or exhibit by such witness.

           (2)    If a petition referred to in sub-section (1) is made and
     the court considers such petition to be reasonable and perceives that
     the examination of such evidence is necessary, the court may
     summon such witness to appear before the court within a maximum
     period of fifteen days and examine him or her.

           (3)    If a summons is issued pursuant to sub-section (2), such
     witness shall appear within the specified time-limit, except for a
     reasonable reason.

           (4)    If a witness fails to appear within the time-limit
     specified pursuant to sub-section (3), the court may impose a fine not
     exceeding two thousand rupees on such witness, issue a warrant for
     arrest and take deposition of such witness when he or she is so
     arrested and brought before it.

           (5)    If any witness is not found or cannot be arrested even
     upon the issuance of a warrant for arrest pursuant to sub-section (4),




                                                                       121
      the court shall pass judgment in the case, awarding a sentence of
      imprisonment for a term not exceeding forty-five days, based on the
      evidence examined, subject to the enforcement of the sentence as and
      when such witness is arrested or found.

             (6)   A summons or warrant for arrest issued pursuant to this
      Section shall be served pursuant to Chapter-6.

113. Daily and travel allowance and security to be provided to
      witness: (1) The concerned police office shall provide witnesses,
      who appear before the court, on behalf of the Government of Nepal,
      in any case related to any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2,
      with such daily and travel allowance as is receivable by the non-
      gazetted first class government employee, and expert witnesses with
      such daily and travel allowance as is receivable by the gazetted third
      class government employee under the law in force.

             (2)   If any government employee appears before the court as
      a witness or expert, the office where the employee is serving shall
      provide him or her with the daily and travel allowance receivable by
      such employee under the law in force.

             (3)   The Government of Nepal shall make necessary
      arrangement for the security of a witness referred to in sub-section
      (1).

114. To protect witness or victim: (1) If any person who is a witness in
      any case related to any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2
      thinks that there is a threat to his or her security while appearing
      before the court or after making deposition in the court, he or she




                                                                        122
     may make a petition, setting out the reason for the same, to the court
     for making security arrangement.

           (2)     If a request referred to in sub-section (1) is made, the
     court may order the concerned body to make arrangement for the
     security of such witness.

           (3)     If an order is made by the court pursuant to sub-section
     (2), it shall be the duty of such body to make arrangement for such
     security.

           (4)     No question shall be raised in any court about any
     measure followed pursuant to the order made by the court for the
     protection of witness pursuant to this Section.

           (5)     The police shall provide security to the victim of any
     particular offence or witness of any case if information is obtained
     that such person is under undue coercion, threat or having adverse
     impact on the security of his or her body from the opponent as being
     the witness thereof.

115. Witness or evidence may be examined even outside the State of
     Nepal: (1) If any court needs to examine any witness or evidence
     that is outside the State of Nepal or issue a commission to that effect
     in relation to any case pending before it, the examination of such
     witness or evidence or the issuance of such commission may be
     effected in accordance with the law in force on mutual legal
     assistance.

            (2)    The form of commission to be used pursuant to sub-
     section (1) shall be as set forth in Schedule-41.




                                                                        123
       (3)   The witness or evidence examined pursuant to sub-
section (1) shall be deemed to have been examined in accordance
with this Act.

      Provided that details of the witness or evidence so examined
shall be certified in accordance with the law of the concerned
country.

      (4)    If the examination of a witness or evidence required to
be examined or has been examined pursuant to this Section in a
language other than the Nepali language, an authentic translation of
the record of such examination or evidence into the Nepali language
shall be submitted to the court.

      (5)    If it is necessary to examine any witness from outside
the State of Nepal or make his or her deposition in the course of
investigation or trial of any case, such deposition may be conducted
by means of video conference or other similar technology as
prescribed for that purpose.

      (6)    Arrangement shall be made for keeping records of the
deposition made by the witness in the course of witness testimony or
deposition conducted in accordance with sub-section (5).

      (7)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, nothing shall be deemed to prevent the trying and settling of
a case by the reason only that evidence cannot be examined pursuant
to this Section.




                                                                  124
                              Chapter-12

  Provisions Relating to Withdrawal, Compromise and Mediation of
                                 Cases

116. Not to withdraw cases: (1) No case once filed in the court on any
     offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule- 2 shall be capable of being
     withdrawn.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     any case other than any of the following cases may be withdrawn:

                  (a)   A case relating to the offence of forged passport
                        or citizenship, immigration, corruption, human
                        trafficking and transportation, smuggling and
                        transaction of narcotic drugs, poaching of, and
                        illicit trade in, wildlife, adulteration of goods of
                        public consumption with poison, murder by
                        administrating poison, in a cruel or inhumane
                        way or by taking control, money laundering, or
                        ancient monuments protection,

                  (b)   A case related to the offence under Section 56 of
                        Chapter-2, Section 129, 130, 131 or 134 of
                        Chapter-6, Section 138, 139 or 141 of Chapter-7,
                        Chapter-8, Section 167 of Chapter-10, Section
                        206 of Chapter-16, Chapter-17, sub-section (1),
                        (2) or (3) of Section 219 of Chapter-18, Section
                        230 or 231 of Chapter-19, or Section 256 of
                        Chapter-22 of Part-2 of the Penal Code,




                                                                        125
               (c)   If the withdrawal of a case is prejudicial to the
                     property right of any person, the case in which
                     consent of such person is not available to that
                     extent.

      (3)      The Government of Nepal shall make directives with
necessary standards on the cases to be withdrawn pursuant to sub-
section (2).

      (4)      If a case to be withdrawn pursuant to sub-section (2),
the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Attorney
General, make decision to its withdrawal, in accordance with the
directives made pursuant to sub-section (3).

      (5)      If the Government of Nepal decides to withdraw a case
pursuant to sub-section (4), the Government of Nepal shall, through
the Attorney General or such government attorney as authorized by
him or her, make a petition, accompanied by the reasons for such
withdrawal, to the concerned court.

      (6)      If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (5), the
court shall conduct hearing before granting permission for the
withdrawal of the case.

      (7)      If, upon conducting hearing pursuant to sub-section (6),
the court deems it reasonable to make order allowing the withdrawal
of the case, the court may make such order allowing such
withdrawal, assigning the reasons for the same.

      (8)      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no case which is under consideration at the stage of appeal,
reference, review or revision shall be subject to withdrawal.



                                                                   126
117. Compromise may be made: Any case related to any of the offences
     under Schedule-3 and Schedule-4 may be compromised at any stage
     whatsoever with the consent of the parties to the case.

           Provided that if, in a case related to cheating or loss of or
     damage to any property of the public or foreign employment, both
     the defendant and the victim make a petition to the Government of
     Nepal for the execution of compromise, the Government of Nepal
     may, if it deems it reasonable, make an order to have such
     compromise executed through the government attorney in respect of
     such case.

118. Procedures for making compromise: (1) The parties shall, if they
     desire to compromise a case pursuant to Section 117, submit to the
     court a joint petition, bearing signature or thumb impression of both
     the parties, setting out the terms of compromise intended to be made
     within the limits of the plaintiff's claim.

           (2)    If a petition containing the terms of compromise is
     submitted to the court pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall
     read out the petition to the parties and ask the parties making such
     petition whether they intend to enter into compromise with free will
     and consent or not.

           (3)    If, in response to a question asked pursuant to sub-
     section (2), the parties reply that they are willing to compromise with
     free will and consent, the judge trying the case shall prepare a deed
     of compromise subject to the terms contained in the joint petition,
     and take signature or thumb impression of the parties and affix his or
     her signature on the deed.




                                                                        127
             (4)    Except in cases where any one has been authorized by a
      power of attorney to enter into compromise pursuant to this Chapter,
      while entering into compromise through an attorney, a separate deed
      of consent executed by the party to that effect shall be submitted.

119. Consequences of withdrawal or compromise of cases: (1) If the
      Government of Nepal withdraws any case pursuant to Section 116,
      no case shall be instituted again against the accused of that case in
      respect of the same offence.

             (2)    If the compromise of a case is made pursuant to Section
      117, no action or case shall be capable of being instituted
      subsequently between the same parties in respect of the same matter.

             Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall bar
      the making of a petition claiming that any party has not complied
      with the terms contained in the deed of compromise.

120. Mediation may be made: (1) If the parties to any case related with
      any offence under Schedule-4 so agree or the court considers
      appropriate to refer such case for mediation, the court may order to
      refer such case for mediation at any time and stage, getting the
      parties to choose the mediator and specifying the mediator if the
      parties fail to do so.

             (2)    If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      parties to the case shall appear before such mediator.

             (3)    After the parties appear pursuant to sub-section (2), the
      mediator shall conduct mediation proceedings, and prepare a deed of
      compromise and submit it to the court if the parties consent to enter
      into compromise.



                                                                            128
      (4)    Upon receipt of a deed of compromise referred to in
sub-section (3), the court shall authenticate such deed.

      (5)    If compromise is executed pursuant to sub-section (4),
the court may, in pursuance of the deed of compromise executed by
the parties, exempt the penalty, fine or fee imposed by the lower
court in relation to such case.




                                                               129
                               Chapter-13

  Provisions Relating to Proceedings, Hearing of, and Judgments in,
                                  Cases

121. Charge to be read out to the accused: (1) When the accused
     appears before the court, the particulars of the offence of which he or
     she is accused, all facts related with such offence, the evidence
     produced by the complainant in support of the charge and
     punishment imposable on him or her if such charge is proved shall
     be clearly stated to him or her, and the claim made in the charge
     sheet shall be read out by the court to him or her.

           (2)     While stating and reminding the charge and punishment
     imposable on such charge pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall
     also state which charge is based on which proof, evidence or
     document, and provide him or her with opportunity to see each
     proof, evidence or document, or to obtain a copy thereof if he or she
     so wishes.

122. Deposition of the accused to be made: (1) After reading out the
     charge and punishment imposable on such charge to the accused
     pursuant to Section 121, the court shall ask him or her whether he or
     she has any statement to make on that charge and record his or her
     deposition.

           (2)     If any accused who has already appeared in the court
     wishes to consult a law practitioner prior to taking of his or her
     deposition, he or she shall be provided with an opportunity to make
     such consultation.




                                                                        130
      (3)    Before recording the deposition pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall inform the accused that he or she shall not be
compelled to testify against himself or herself and reminded of the
matter that such testimony if made by him or her may be admissible
in evidence against him or her.

      (4)    In the process of reminding the accused of the matters
pursuant to sub-section (3), the demand, if any, made by the
government attorney offering a reduction in sentence against him or
her and the relevant provision of the law in force shall also be stated
to him or her.

      (5)    In recording the deposition of the accused pursuant to
this Section, each question and answer to such question shall both be
recorded, and where deposition has been taken through video
conference, such deposition shall also be recorded.

      (6)    After recording the deposition referred to in sub-section
(5), signature or thumb impressions of the accused shall be taken on
such record and the judge also shall sign it.

      Provided that where deposition has been made through video
conference, the judge shall authenticate such matter.

      (7)    If, in taking deposition of the accused pursuant to this
Section, any matter is omitted to be inquired with him or her, the
court may summon the appearance of such accused and take re-
deposition of the omitted matter from him or her.

      (8)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in relation to a case related to any offence under Schedule-4,
a statement of defense shall be submitted in the form referred to in



                                                                   131
     Schedule-42, within the time-limit set forth in the process issued by
     the court.

123. Judgment to be made immediately if the accused pleads guilty of
     offence: (1) If any accused, pleading guilty of the offence which he
     or she is charged with, makes a statement of confession before the
     court, the court may, also having regard to the truth and reliability of
     such statement, make judgment immediately.

           Provided that:

                  (a)   In spite of such statement of confession by the
                        accused, if the court, in view of the evidence
                        contained in the case-file, circumstances under
                        which the offence was committed or any other
                        matter, has any reason to believe that his or her
                        confession is not true, the court shall not make
                        judgment in the case pursuant to this Section but
                        shall order the examination of further evidence in
                        the case, by executing a memorandum of order,
                        accompanied by the reasons therefor,

                  (b)   If the accused who has confessed the offence
                        which he or she is charged with makes a plea for
                        a reduction in the sentence, the court shall, stating
                        all matters pertaining thereto, take his or her
                        deposition and examine evidence thereon.

           (2)    If, in deposing before the court, any accused makes a
     plea that is different from the plea he or she has made before the
     investigating authority and the plaintiff makes submission for




                                                                         132
     permission to re-conduct investigation into the evidence or plea
     produced or made by him or her and submit further proof or
     evidence to the court, the court may give permission to produce such
     additional proof or evidence.

             (3)   If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), the court
     shall not adjudge the case until such additional proof or evidence is
     produced.

             Provided that such additional proof or evidence shall be
     produced prior to the order for taking and trying of evidence.

             (4)   If any accused does not confess fully the offence which
     he or she is charged with but confesses it partially, the court shall
     order the examination of further evidence to the extent only of the
     matter which he or she has not confessed.

124. Discussion may be held between plaintiff and defendant: (1) If
     the accused has not pleaded guilty of the offence pursuant to Section
     123, the court may order to hold discussion between the plaintiff and
     the defendant in order to ascertain the matter to be adjudged in the
     case.

             (2)   If an order is made to hold discussion pursuant to sub-
     section (1), the plaintiff, defendant and the accused, in respect of a
     case in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff, shall also appear
     in the court, and if such accused so wishes, his or her law practitioner
     may also appear.

             (3)   In the discussion referred to in sub-section (1), the
     plaintiff and the defendant may present claim and defense and
     evidence relevant thereto, respectively.



                                                                         133
          (4)    The court may ascertain the matter to be adjudged in the
    case from the claim, defense and evidence submitted by the plaintiff
    and the defendant pursuant to sub-section (3).

125. Appointment of date for appearance for examination of
    evidence: (1) The court shall, in any of the following circumstances,
    execute a memorandum of order, setting out, inter alia, the matters to
    be adjudged as ascertained pursuant to Section 124, and appoint the
    date for appearance for the examination of evidence:

                 (a)   If the accused refuses to make deposition
                       pursuant to Section 122,

                 (b)   If the defendant does not submit a statement of
                       defense,

                 (c)   If the accused makes deposition or statement of
                       defense, denying wholly or partly the charge
                       made against him or her,

                 (d)   If the court executes a memorandum of order for
                       the examination of evidence pursuant to clause
                       (a) or (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of
                       Section 123,

                 (e)   Such other circumstance as may be held
                       appropriate by the court.

          (2)    While appointing the date for appearance for the
    examination of evidence pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall
    estimate the time required for the witnesses to appear and the
    documentary evidence and thing to be produced, and so appoint such
    date that evidence is collected as soon as possible.



                                                                      134
           (3)    If the plaintiff of a case makes a request for time for the
     submission of further evidence or proof pursuant to sub-section (2)
     of Section 123, the court shall, in appointing the date for appearance
     pursuant to sub-section (1), generally appoint the date for appearance
     for the examination of evidence so that evidence is examined not
     later than two months after the filing of case.

           (4)    In making order for appointing the date for appearance
     for the examination of evidence pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3),
     such order shall be so issued that the examination of all evidences
     required to be examined in the case is made at the same time as far as
     possible.

           (5)    Subsequent to the order appointing the date for
     appearance pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the concerned party to
     the case shall submit or produce such evidence or witness before the
     court on the appointed date for appearance as required to be
     submitted or produced by that party.

126. Party or witness held in detention or imprisonment to be
     produced: (1) If any party or witness of a case, who is held in
     detention or imprisonment, is required to be produced to make his or
     her statement or deposition or in relation to another case relevant to
     him or her, the court shall, setting out the reason, order the concerned
     office to produce such party or witness before the court on the date
     appointed for appearance for that purpose.

           (2)    Upon receipt of an order pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     concerned office shall produce before the court such party or witness
     accompanied by the security personnel.




                                                                         135
           (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
     if there is a reasonable reason for not being able to produce such
     party or witness before the court because of security or physical
     disability, such office may, with the consent of the court, arrange for
     the examination of him or her through video conference.

           (4)    If any party or witness of a case is examined through
     video conference pursuant to sub-section (3), the matters stated by
     him or her shall be recorded.

127. Order of examining evidence: (1) Except as otherwise ordered by
     the court, the evidence of the plaintiff shall first be examined and
     then the evidence of the defendant shall be examined on the date
     appointed for appearance for the examination of evidence, subject to
     the law of evidence.

           (2)    If one party makes any objection immediately that any
     evidence produced by the other party or matter deposed by any
     witness is not admissible in evidence or should not be taken as
     evidence or is irrelevant to the case, the judge shall immediately
     decide whether the objection is reasonable or not.

           (3)    The court shall not allow any party to produce any
     evidence which is irrelevant to the case.

128. Provisions relating to trial of person of unsound mind: (1) If
     there is any reasonable reason to believe that any accused person,
     being of unsound mind, is incapable of making his or her defense,
     the court may also order causing such person to be examined and
     treated by a licensed doctor.




                                                                        136
          (2)   If, upon the examination made pursuant to sub-section
(1), it appears that the accused is incapable of making his or her
defense because of unsound mind, the court shall adjourn the case in
the case of such person, by executing a memorandum of order to that
effect.

          (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Act, if such accused is held in detention and the court so considers
reasonable, it may, at the time when proceeding is conducted
pursuant to sub-section (1) or subsequent to the execution of the
memorandum of order pursuant to sub-section (2), release such
accused from detention.

          (4)   In releasing the accused pursuant to sub-section (3), the
court shall cause his or her guardian to make a bond that he or she
shall take care of the accused in a manner to prevent the accused
from doing any kind of injury or harm to any other person and
produce the accused before the court when so ordered by the court.

          (5)   In releasing the accused pursuant to sub-section (4), the
court may take bail/bond or guarantee from the guardian in
accordance with Chapter-7.

          (6)   Except where the accused, who is held in detention and
is of unsound mind, is released from detention pursuant to sub-
section (3), the court shall order the concerned prison to take special
care of such accused placed in detention for trial.

          (7)   If the case of the accused of unsound mind is adjourned
pursuant to sub-section (2), the court shall, whenever the accused
becomes of sound mind, revive the adjournment, cause the




                                                                     137
     appearance of the accused before the court and proceed with the trial
     of the case.

           Provided that prior to so reviving the adjournment, the court
     shall cause the accused to be examined again by a licensed medical
     doctor, and that he or she has become of sound mind shall be
     certified by such doctor.

           (8)      The court may, if it so wishes, order the medical doctor
     who has made certification of soundness pursuant to sub-section (1)
     or (7) to appear before the court as a witness.

           (9)      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if there are other defendants also, along with the person of
     unsound mind, nothing shall be deemed to bar the hearing of the case
     in the case of such other defendants.

129. Trial of cases to be conducted in open bench: The court shall
     conduct the trial of cases in open bench.

           Provided that the trail of a case related to the offence of
     espionage, human trafficking and transportation, sexual offence, a
     case involving a child as the accused or victim, violence against
     women, rape, incest or a case running between husband and wife or
     any other case that the court has, considering it reasonable to do so,
     ordered for trial in camera, may be conducted in camera, and the
     court may prohibit the access to such bench of any person, other than
     the concerned parties to that case, concerned law practitioners,
     employees of the court and such other persons as the court considers
     necessary.




                                                                        138
130. Law practitioner may be appointed by the accused for his or her
     defense: (1) Any person accused of any offence may appoint a law
     practitioner of his or her choice for his or her defense, rebutting the
     charge made against him or her, and pleading the case.

           (2)    If an accused who is charged with the offence
     punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for life or for a term of ten
     years or more fails to appoint his or her law practitioner, the court
     may, in the case of such accused, order that the law practitioner
     appointed by the court defend him or her.

            (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, even if any accused does not intend to appoint a law
     practitioner pursuant to sub-section (1) or refuses to have defended
     by the law practitioner appointed by the court pursuant to sub-section
     (2), nothing shall be deemed to prevent proceeding the case.

131. Judgment to be made: (1) The judge shall make judgment in a case
     generally within one month after the termination of examination of
     evidence in the case.

           (2)    If it is not possible to make judgment within the period
     referred to in sub-section (1), information thereof, accompanied by
     the reason for the same, shall be given to the appeal hearing court.

           (3)    Judgment to be made pursuant to this Section shall be in
     the form referred to in Schedule-43 and state, inter alia, the
     following matters:

                  (a)     Short description of the case and other necessary
                          matters relevant thereto,




                                                                            139
             (b)    Main points of pleading, if any, made by the law
                    practitioner in the case,

             (c)    Evidence produced by the parties to the case,
                    credibility or refutability of such evidence, the
                    basis thereof, sufficiency or insufficiency of such
                    evidence,

             (d)    Matters relating to the legal question, if any,
                    raised by any party to the case,

             (e)    Grounds for the conviction or acquittal of offence
                    and the reasons for the same,

             (f)    Whether the judgment is appealable or not, and
                    the court in which appeal shall lie,

             (g)    Other necessary matters.

      (4)    In making judgment pursuant to this Section, the judge
may read out the full text of the judgment, if prepared, and the
decision only if the full text is not so prepared.

      (5)    If only the decision is read out pursuant to sub-section
(4), the judge shall cause it to be taken down in short hand in the
decision book, sign it and take signature or thumb impression of the
parties to the case who are in attendance on it.

      Provided that it shall not be necessary to cause it to be signed
by the government attorney in a state case in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff.




                                                                   140
               (6)   If a decision is read out pursuant to sub-section (5), the
      judge shall write down the judgment and keep it in the case-file
      within one month.

               Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, the term
      "decision read out" means the decision read out upon sentencing.

               (7)   If the judgment is not set down within the time-limit
      referred to in sub-section (6), the concerned party may make a
      complaint to the Chief Judge of the concerned High Court, in the
      case of a judgment of that High Court or a court subordinate to it,
      and to the Chief Justice in the case of a judgment of the Supreme
      Court, not later than three days after the expiration of such time-
      limit.

               (8)   If a complaint is made pursuant to sub-section (7), the
      concerned Chief Judge or the Chief Justice shall give direction to the
      concerned judge to prepare the judgment within a week.

               (9)   The court shall, as far as possible, also put the decision
      referred to in sub-section (5) on its website immediately.

               (10) The court shall affix the decisions prepared and
      authenticated in each week on its notice board and also put them on
      the website.

132. Notice and copy of judgment to be given: (1) The court shall give a
      notice of judgment in the form referred to in Schedule-44 to the
      accused or defendant who has not been involved in the proceedings
      of the case from the beginning, the accused held in detention or
      imprisonment or the accused of a case heard ex parte.




                                                                           141
           (2)    The notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be served
     as if it were a summons, and if such notice cannot be served, it shall
     be published in any national daily newspaper owned by the
     Government of Nepal.

           (3)    The concerned party shall bear the expenses to be
     incurred in the publication of a notice referred to in sub-section (2) in
     relation to any case under Schedule-4.

           (4)    The information of judgment of any of the cases under
     Schedule-1, Schedule-2 and Schedule-3 shall also be given to the
     concerned government attorney office.

133. Dismissal of cases on death: (1) Notwithstanding anything
     contained elsewhere in this Act, if the accused or defendant of any
     case dies, the court shall dismiss such case.

           Provided that if there are more than one accused or defendant,
     the case shall not be dismissed even on the death of any one accused.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     despite the death of the accused or defendant in a case involving the
     claimed amount, the court may decide to set the claimed amount
     upon examining the evidence included in the case-file and such other
     evidence as the court finds necessary to examine.

           (3)    If, despite the death of any complainant in any case
     referred to in sub-section (2), the successor to such complainant
     appears to accept and continue the case within thirty days of his or
     her death, the court may decide as to whether or not compensation
     should be awarded by examining the evidence contained in the case-
     file and any other evidence required to be examined.



                                                                          142
       (4)   In the event of the death of a party making appeal, or
petition for review or revision or of a person who was originally
convicted of the offence in such case, the case subject to such appeal,
review or revision petition shall abate.

      Provided that:

             (a)    In the event of the death of any one of the same
                    party, the case shall not abate without trying the
                    case in respect of the other persons,

             (b)    In respect of a case involving any claimed
                    amount, the successor may, if he or she so
                    wishes, take over the case within thirty-five days
                    from the date of receipt of information.




                                                                   143
                                Chapter-14

      Provisions Relating to Appeal and Reference for Sanction

134. Appeal to lie: (1) A party who is not satisfied with a judgment or
      final order made by a court may make an appeal within thirty days
      from the date of knowledge of the judgment.

              Provided that if an appealing party makes a petition showing
      the cause of being unable to make appeal within that time-limit and
      the appeal hearing court considers the petition to be reasonable, it
      may order the extension of the time-limit for a maximum of thirty
      days.

              (2)   A person wishing to make an appeal pursuant to sub-
      section (1) shall file it with the court which hears appeals from the
      court making judgment.

              (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Act, if any party to a case or his or her attorney is present, or his or
      her law practitioner has made pleadings, before the court at the time
      of hearing and judgment is made on the same day, the party to the
      case shall be deemed to have known that such judgment has been
      made.

              (4)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, the party shall be deemed to have ipso facto known the
      judgment after the expiry of a period of one year from the date of
      judgment.

135. Filing of appeal through judgment making court or prison where
      one is imprisoned: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
      section (2) of Section 134, any person wishing to make appeal



                                                                          144
     pursuant to sub-section (1) of that Section may make appeal through
     the judgment making court or also through the prison where the
     person convicted of the offence pursuant to such judgment is
     imprisoned.

           (2)     If an appeal is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), such
     court or prison shall, as soon as possible, forward the appeal to the
     appeal hearing court, setting out the details of the service or
     payment, if any, by the appellant of the sentence imposed on him or
     her or the bail/bond or guarantee, if any, furnished by him or her in
     consideration for such sentence, and give information thereof to the
     appellant.

           (3)     The judgment making court shall forward the case-file
     along with the appeal pursuant to sub-section (2).

136. Procedures to be fulfilled in making appeal: (1) A memorandum
     of appeal shall be made in the form referred to in Schedule-45.

           (2)     Every memorandum of appeal to be made pursuant to
     sub-section (1) shall clearly state, inter alia, the full name and
     address of the appellant and that of the respondent, short description
     of the case, the matters contained in the decision of the lower court
     with which the appellant is dissatisfied and grounds for such
     dissatisfaction, the matters to be decided by the appeal hearing court
     and the relevant laws, and shall bear signature or thumb impression
     of the appellant.

           (3)     Every memorandum of appeal to be made pursuant to
     sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by the following documents:




                                                                       145
                 (a)    A copy of the judgment intended to be appealed
                        against,

                 (b)    If any sentence is imposed on the appellant by the
                        judgment, evidence showing that he or she has
                        served or paid such sentence or has been
                        imprisoned or furnished a bail/bond or guarantee
                        for the same.

137. To remain in imprisonment while making appeal: (1) Any of the
     following persons shall remain in imprisonment while making
     appeal:

                 (a)    A person who is sentenced to imprisonment for
                        life,

                 (b)    A person who is sentenced to imprisonment for a
                        term exceeding ten years,

                 (c)    A person who, upon being convicted of any
                        offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, is
                        sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding
                        three years,

                 (d)    A person who, having been remanded in
                        detention for trial, is convicted of the offence and
                        sentenced to imprisonment,

                 (e)    A person who is sentenced to imprisonment and
                        has not permanent residence in Nepal.

           (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a person who is above seventy-five years of age or a person who is
     recommended by the medical board formed by the Government of


                                                                        146
Nepal that he or she, owing to suffering from an incurable or highly
severe disease, cannot stay in detention or an offender who has not
been held in detention by an order of the court that he or she is not
required to be remanded in detention but is sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years makes a petition,
setting out the reason, for a leave of appeal without being held in
detention, and if such reason appears to be reasonable, the appeal
hearing court may, upon taking a bail/bond or guarantee from him or
her, grant the leave of appeal.

       (3)   If a leave of appeal is granted pursuant to sub-section
(2), such court shall execute a memorandum of order recording the
reasons for such leave to make appeal without being held in
detention and the memorandum of order shall be included in the
case-file.

       (4)   Any person other than that mentioned in sub-sections
(1) and (2) may make appeal by furnishing with the court passing
judgment or the appeal hearing court a bail/bond or guarantee for the
sentence imposed on the person by that judgment.

       (5)   If a person who does not furnish a bail/bond or
guarantee pursuant to sub-section (4) is sentenced to imprisonment,
that person may appeal only being held in imprisonment for such
sentence.

       (6)   If decision cannot be made on the appeal made by a
person who is imprisoned for being unable to furnish a bail/bond or
guarantee pursuant to sub-section (2) or (4) within six months from
the date of filing of such appeal, the concerned appeal hearing court




                                                                 147
shall try the case by releasing that person from imprisonment after
the said period and holding him or her on recognizance.

      (7)     In the event of failure to make judgment within the
period referred to in sub-section (6), such court shall give
information thereof, accompanied by the reason therefor, to the court
hearing appeal.

       (8)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section:

             (a) In the case of a person who having been held in
                  detention or imprisonment in the course of
                  proceedings of the case has already served the
                  sentence as commuted by the judgment, such person
                  shall not be required to remain in prison or furnish a
                  bail/bond or guarantee to make appeal,

             (b) No person shall be imprisoned for a period in excess
                  of the sentence imposed by the judgment only by the
                  reason that appeal has been made.

      (9) In the case of a person furnishing a bail/bond or guarantee
pursuant to Chapter-7, such bail/bond or guarantee may, to the extent
of the sufficiency of such bail/bond or guarantee, be maintained as a
bail/bond or guarantee, for the purposes of this Section.

      (10) In taking a bail/bond or guarantee pursuant to this
Section, the court may, having regard to the need and propriety,
require and take the bail/bond or guarantee also for such claimed
amount of a governmental or public body as is held recoverable by
the judgment.



                                                                    148
            (11) If the bail/bond or guarantee of any property belonging
      to any person other than the appellant has been furnished, such
      property shall not be maintained as a bail/bond or guarantee for the
      purposes of this Section without the consent of that person.

138. Calling for case file: (1) Except in cases where the case-file is
      received pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 135, the appeal
      hearing court shall, upon the filing of an appeal, and as soon as
      possible, order the concerned court to send the case-file of such case.

            (2)    The concerned court shall send the case-file to the
      appeal hearing court within three days from the date of receipt of the
      order pursuant to sub-section (1).

139. Appointment of date for appearance for hearing appeal: Upon
      receipt of the case-file pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 135 or
      Section 138, the appeal hearing court shall appoint the date for
      appearance for the hearing of the appeal.

140. Hearing of appeal: (1) The appeal hearing court shall complete the
      hearing of appeal within six months after the date of receipt of the
      case-file from the lower court.

            (2)    If, while hearing the appeal pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the appeal hearing court considers that the decision made by the
      lower court is reasonable and does not suffer any substantial
      difference, it may dismiss the appeal, by recording its reasons for
      doing so.

            (3)    If, except for the dismissal of the appeal plea pursuant
      to sub-section (2), it appears that the pleas of the appeal should be
      heard, the appeal hearing court shall, setting out the reasons for the



                                                                          149
     same, appoint the date for appearance for the hearing of the appeal
     and give a notice to the respondent to rebut the pleas of appeal.

           (4)    In giving a notice referred to in sub-section (3), a notice
     of fifteen days shall be given, also accompanied by a copy of the
     memorandum of appeal.

           (5) A person who has obtained a notice pursuant to sub-section
     (3) may submit defense in writing to defend himself or herself and
     rebut the pleas of appeal, within the period specified by the court.

           (6) The defense in writing to be submitted to the court pursuant
     to sub-section (5) shall be in the form set forth in Schedule-46.

           (7) Upon hearing the appeal pursuant to sub-section (3), the
     court shall decide the appeal.

141. Appeal liable to be heard ex parte in absence of respondent: (1)
     If the respondent does not appear within the time-limit of the notice
     given pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 140, the appeal hearing
     court may appoint such another date for appearance for deciding the
     appeal as falling after at least fifteen days, and hear the appeal ex
     parte on such date and decide it.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if the respondent makes a petition, prior to the date appointed for
     appearance pursuant to sub-section (1), showing a reasonable reason
     for being unable to appear within the time-limit of the notice given
     pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 140, and such reason seems to
     be reasonable, the court shall order the extension of the time-limit,
     showing such reason, and also order the respondent to appear on the




                                                                            150
      date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1), and hear and decide the
      appeal.

142. Not required to be on recognizance: (1) If an appellant or
      respondent does not wish to remain on recognizance in the course of
      the appeal proceedings, he or she may make a petition to that effect
      to the court.

            (2)       If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      court may discontinue his or her appearance on the appointed dates,
      by getting a deed to be executed by the appellant or respondent to the
      effect that he or she will appear as and when the court so requires.

            Provided that the appellant or respondent who is not on
      recognizance may, if he or she so wishes, appear on the date
      appointed for appearance for the hearing of the appeal.

            (3)       Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if, during the hearing of appeal, the court is of the opinion
      that the appellant should be inquired into any matter or required to
      produce any evidence in relation to the appeal, the court may order
      the appellant to keep on appearing on the appointed dates for
      appearance.

143. Service of notice or order on appellant or respondent as if it were
      a summons: The notice or order to be issued by the court to the
      appellant or respondent pursuant to Section 140, 141 or 142 shall be
      served in accordance with Chapter-6 as if it were a summons.

144. Powers of appeal hearing court: (1) In hearing the appeal pursuant
      to this Chapter, the appeal hearing court shall have the following
      powers:



                                                                             151
                  (a)   To approve, void or reverse or partially reverse the
                        judgment of the lower court,

                  (b)   To reduce or enhance the extent of the sentence
                        commuted by the lower court to the offender, or to
                        alter the sentence,

                  (c)   Where the judgment has been made without
                        examining such evidence as required to have been
                        examined, to make such examination by itself or to
                        order the lower court to make such examination,

                  (d)   If any particular matter required to have been
                        adjudged in the case has not been adjudged, to
                        adjudge itself or order the lower court to adjudge
                        such matter.

            (2)    If an appeal from the judgment passed by the lower
     court is made by any particular offender or complainant only, and the
     decision on the appeal will render the judgment of the lower court to
     be affected in the case of the offender or defendant not making
     appeal, the appeal hearing court, in exercise of the powers set forth
     in sub-section (1), may, setting out and recording the reasons
     therefor, pass judgment in accordance with law also in the case of
     such accused.

           (3)     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, the appeal hearing court may, as required, exercise such
     powers as may be exercised by the lower court.

145. Reference for sanction: (1) If any court passes judgment
     commuting a sentence of imprisonment for a term of twenty years or



                                                                          152
     more or imprisonment for life to any person, it shall refer such
     judgment for sanction, accompanied by the case-file, to the appeal
     hearing court within thirty-five days from the date of passage of such
     judgment.

           (2)    If a reference for sanction is made pursuant to sub-
     section (1) and even the appeal hearing court passes judgment
     confirming the sentence of imprisonment for a term of twenty years
     or more or imprisonment for life to the accused, such judgment shall
     then be referred to the Supreme Court for sanction.

146. Appeal against reference judgment: A party, who is dissatisfied
     with the judgment so passed by the court as to be referred to for
     sanction pursuant to Section 145, may appeal against it.

147. Not to pass reference judgment until expiration of time-limit for
     appeal: (1) In any case submitted for reference pursuant to Section
     145, no reference judgment shall be made until the time-limit
     allowed for preferring an appeal expires.

           (2)    If an appeal is made within the time-limit referred to in
     sub-section (1), the records of reference judgment shall be crossed
     off and the case shall be heard on appeal.

           Provided that if an appeal is made by any person only, out of
     the persons subjected to sentence, decision shall be made by virtue of
     the same appeal also in cases of those who have not made appeal.

148. Procedures for making reference for sanction: (1) In referring a
     judgment for sanction in any case pursuant to Section 145, the court
     shall forward the case-file of that case along with the reference.




                                                                          153
           (2)    If the accused is held in detention in the case in which
     reference judgment is made pursuant to sub-section (1), reference
     shall also specify the date on which the accused was held in
     detention and the name of the prison where he or she is being kept,
     and details of the accused if he or she has absconded or escaped from
     the detention.

           (3)    The other procedures on the hearing of reference for
     sanction shall be the same as applicable to the hearing of appeal.

149. Powers of court in dealing with reference for sanction: (1) Any
     court dealing with reference may exercise such powers as may be
     exercised by the appeal hearing court.

           (2)    If, in examining a reference for sanction, it appears that
     the verdict of the judgment of the lower court is not in order and any
     alteration can be made therein, the concerned parties shall be
     summoned to appear, by giving the time-limit of fifteen days.

150. Appeal and reference judgment: The appeal judgment shall be
     made in the form referred to in Schedule-47, and the reference
     judgment in the form referred to in Schedule-48.

           Provided that where a single judgment has to be made on
     appeal and on reference for sanction, such judgment shall be made in
     the form referred to in Schedule-47.




                                                                          154
                               Chapter-15

            Provisions Relating to Execution of Judgments

151. To establish record of sentence: (1) If the court passes any
     judgment in any case, the concerned court shall establish a record of
     the sentence, fine or the established claimed amount or compensation
     pursuant to such judgment.

            (2)    If the appeal hearing court passes judgment convicting
     any person of any offence or any person is convicted of any offence
     being judgment of the lower court reversed or voided, it shall
     establish a record thereof and send a copy of the judgment to the
     concerned District Court for its execution.

            (3)    After establishing a record pursuant to sub-section (1) or
     (2), the concerned court shall execute the judgment, and if any body
     has to do any act for the execution of judgment, it shall order the
     body to do such act.

            (4)    While making an order pursuant to sub-section (3), if
     the person sentenced to imprisonment is present in the court, the
     court shall also forward him or her to the prison; and if such person
     is neither present in the court nor held in detention or prison, the
     court shall send an order, in the form referred to in Schedule-49, to
     the concerned police office to arrest and hand over him or her to the
     prison.

            (5)    If the same offender is liable to more than one sentence
     and there is a doubt as to which sentence is the higher, the prison
     office shall write to the concerned district court and do as sanctioned
     by the district court.



                                                                         155
152. Bodies for judgment execution: (1) The District Court where the
     charge sheet or plaint has been filed shall execute the judgment on a
     case irrespective of the tier of court making such judgment.

           (2)     The concerned District Court shall also execute a
     judgment on a case proceeded and adjudicated originally by the
     appeal hearing court.

           (3)     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if the District Court responsible for the execution of a
     judgment cannot be identified because of the number of defendants,
     location of their residence or property, the District Court designated
     by the appeal hearing court shall execute the judgment of such case.

           (4)     The concerned bodies shall execute judgments made by
     the judicial bodies other than the regular courts.

           (5)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
     the concerned District Court shall execute the judgment pursuant to
     this Act, unless otherwise provided by law in respect of judgment
     execution.

153. Postponement of execution of judgments: (1) The court shall
     postpone the execution of a judgment in the following circumstance:

                  (a) If an appeal is made in a case which is appealable
                      pursuant to law, until the case is finally adjudicated
                      on appeal, or if no such appeal is made, until the
                      time-limit allowed for preferring appeal is expired,

                  (b) If the case is one requiring reference for sanction
                      pursuant to law, until the reference made for
                      sanction is decided.



                                                                         156
            (2)    When an appeal is made pursuant to clause (a) of sub-
      section (1), the appellant shall submit a petition stating that matter to
      the concerned court.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if a judgment is made holding any offender liable to a sentence of
      imprisonment, such offender shall be immediately sent to
      imprisonment, except as otherwise provided in this Act.

154. Confinement in prison: (1) Upon receipt of an order referred to in
      Section 151 or upon the person held to be offender being arrested by
      the police office, the concerned prison office shall confine the
      offender in prison in accordance with law.

            Provided that if a child below eighteen years of age is
      convicted of an offence, the child shall be held in a separate children
      reform home or similar other home as provided by the Government
      of Nepal.

            (2)    While confining an offender in prison pursuant to sub-
      section (1), the prison office shall prepare and update the record
      containing information, inter alia, of when the offender has been
      confined in prison or arrested and when the service of the sentence of
      imprisonment will complete.

155. Payment of money in lieu of imprisonment: (1) If, in view of the
      age of the offender who is convicted, at the first instance, of any
      offence punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for a term of one
      year or less, gravity of the offence, manner of commission of the
      offence and his or her conduct, as well, the court does not consider it
      appropriate to confine the offender in prison and is of the view that




                                                                           157
there will be no threat to the public peace, law and order if he or she
is released, and the court, for the reasons to be recorded, considers it
appropriate to dispense with the requirement of undergoing
imprisonment upon payment of a fine in lieu of imprisonment, the
court may order that the offender be not liable to undergo
imprisonment if he or she makes payment of money in lieu of
imprisonment.

      (2)      Prior to issuing an order pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court shall cause a deed to be executed by the offender that he or she
will not commit any kind of offence henceforth and will comply with
good conduct.

      (3)      In making payment of money by an offender who is
dispensed with the requirement of undergoing imprisonment upon
payment of money in lieu of imprisonment pursuant to sub-section
(1), the offender shall pay money by three hundred rupees a day of
imprisonment.

      (4)      If any offender who is dispensed with the requirement
of undergoing imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1) commits any
offense punishable by a sentence of imprisonment within three years
after the date of such release, the sentence also including that of
imprisonment imposed on him or her by the previous judgment shall
be executed.

      (5)      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any foreign national who has been convicted of any
offence punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for a term of one
year or less and is in detention or imprisonment makes a petition for
dispensing with the requirement of undergoing imprisonment upon


                                                                     158
payment of a fine in lieu of the imprisonment, and if the offence is
not any offence set forth in sub-section (4) of Section 159, and the
court    considers   appropriate to    release that    offender from
imprisonment upon payment of a fine in lieu of the imprisonment,
the court may order that the offender will not be liable to undergo
imprisonment if he or she makes payment in lump sum of the
amount to be set by five hundred rupees a day.

        (6)   In making an order pursuant to sub-section (5), the court
shall order that such person be sent out of Nepal within seven days
and the immigration office shall send such person out of Nepal
pursuant to the court order.

        (7)   Fifty percent of the amount received pursuant to sub-
sections (3) and (5) shall be deposited into the victim relief fund
established in accordance with law.

        (8)   If payment of money is made pursuant to this Section,
the offender shall be deemed to have served the sentence of
imprisonment.

        (9)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the record of imprisonment of the person who is dispensed
with the requirement of undergoing imprisonment pursuant to this
Section shall remain valid until the period of completion of the
service of the sentence of imprisonment, and the court may, at any
time, revoke the order under this Section if he or she upholds
conduct or commits offence, contrary to sub-sections (2) and (4).




                                                                    159
            (10) If an order is revoked pursuant to sub-section (9), such
      offender shall serve the whole sentence commuted to him or her, by
      undergoing imprisonment.

156. Property to be attached: (1) If the property belonging to a person
      against whom a warrant for arrest has been issued pursuant to sub-
      section (4) of Section 151 has not been attached earlier or if such
      person cannot be arrested, the concerned police office may make a
      report, also indicating the description of his or her property, to the
      court for making attachment to the property to which such person has
      partition entitlement.

            (2)    If a report is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      concerned court shall issue an order to the concerned land revenue
      office or other body or institution to attach the property to which
      such person has entitlement.

            (3)    If, in attaching the property pursuant to sub-section (2),
      property more than that required to be attached has been attached,
      such person may make a petition to the concerned court to release
      such excess property attached.

            (4)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (3) and,
      upon examination of such petition, it appears that excess property
      has been so attached, the court may make an order to the concerned
      land revenue office or body or institution to release the attachment of
      such excess property, and if such order is made, such office or body
      shall release such property.

            (5)    If an offender is liable to pay the claimed amount,
      compensation or other amount pursuant to a judgment of the court,




                                                                         160
     such amount shall, in accordance with this Chapter, be recovered
     from the property attached pursuant to sub-section (1), and only the
     remaining property shall be attached.

157. Property may be auctioned: (1) If any offender cannot be arrested
     even until six months from the date of issue of warrant for arresting
     that offender pursuant to sub-section (4) of Section 151, the amount
     of fine or compensation payable as per the judgment shall be
     recovered by receiving cash from the concerned body or institution if
     the property attached pursuant to Section 156 is cash and by
     auctioning the property so attached if it is other movable or
     immovable property and paying the amount in consideration for a
     fine or government claimed amount to the consolidated fund, and the
     amount remaining upon payment of compensation, if any, shall be
     returned to his or her successor.

           (2)    If the offender is arrested before terminating the record
     of sentence pursuant to this Act and intends to pay in cash the fine,
     claimed amount or compensation to which he or she is liable, the
     sentence of imprisonment shall be executed by returning to him or
     her the property attached pursuant to Section 156, upon recovering
     the expenses incurred in the execution of such attachment if such
     property has not yet been auctioned, and the proceeds of the auction
     sale of the property upon recovering the expenses incurred in the
     execution of such attachment and auction, if such property has been
     auctioned.

158. Remission of sentence in the event of death of the person
     sentenced: (1) In the event of the death of a person who is convicted
     by the court of an offence and sentenced therefor, the whole sentence



                                                                       161
     of imprisonment or fine remaining to be executed until the time of
     his or her death shall ipso facto be remitted.

           (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
     if a person liable to pay any governmental or personal claimed
     amount, compensation or other amount dies before making such
     payment, such amount or compensation shall, in accordance with this
     Act, be recovered from the property belonging to that person only to
     the extent of the amount recoverable from such property.

           (3)    In    making    recovery    of      any   claimed   amount,
     compensation or amount pursuant to sub-section                   (2), the
     governmental      claimed   amount,     compensation      and    personal
     compensation and claimed amount shall be recovered in respective
     order of priority from the property to the extent of recoverability
     from the property of such person.

159. Pardon many be made: (1) A person who is sentenced by a court
     judgment to punishment for an offence may make a petition to the
     President, through the Ministry of Home Affairs, for the pardon,
     suspension, alteration or reduction of that sentence.

           (2)    In making a petition pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     petitioner shall attach a copy of the judgment of the court by which
     he or she was sentenced.

           (3)    If a petition made pursuant to sub-section (1) is
     forwarded by the President to the Ministry of Home Affairs for
     necessary action, the Ministry shall, having regard to the following
     matters, make a submission to the Government of Nepal to decide




                                                                           162
whether or not to pardon, suspend, alter or reduce the sentence
imposed on the petitioner:

                  (a)   Nature of the offence, and the circumstances
                        under which the offence was committed,

                  (b)   Age and physical condition of the offender,

                  (c)   Limit/ceiling of the sentence imposed on the
                        offender,

                  (d)   Whether or not the offender was sentenced to
                        imprisonment for committing any offence prior to
                        that punishment sentenced to him or her, and if he
                        or she was so sentenced, the nature of such
                        offence and the sentence served by him or her,

                  (e)   Whether or not the offender is held in detention.

      (4)         Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in sub-
section (3), no action may be taken to pardon, suspend, alter or
reduce the sentence imposed on the offender of any of the following
offences:

            (a) Corruption,

            (b) Torture,

            (c) Rape,

            (d) Murder in a cruel and inhumane way or by taking
                    control,

            (e) Genocide,

            (f)     Explosives,




                                                                         163
             (g) Kidnapping, hostage-taking or enforced disappearance,

             (h) Human trafficking and transportation,

             (i)     Money laundering, and

             (j)     Narcotic drugs trafficking or transaction punishable
                     by a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding
                     three years.

       (5)         Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the case is under consideration of any court by way of
appeal, reference for sanction, review or revision or if the sentence
imposed by the judgment of a court has not become final, the
Ministry of Home Affairs may not take action referred to in sub-
section (3).

      (6)          Prior to making a decision pursuant to sub-section (3),
the Government of Nepal may consult the parole and probation
board established by law.

      (7) If, while making decision pursuant to sub-section (3), the
Government of Nepal has any reasonable reason for pardoning the
whole or any part of, suspending, altering or reducing, the sentence
imposed on the petitioner, it shall make a recommendation,
accompanied by its opinion along with the grounds therefor, to the
President.

      (8)          If the sentence imposed on any offender is pardoned,
suspended, altered or reduced by the President pursuant to the
recommendation made by the Government of Nepal under sub-
section (7), the Government of Nepal shall give a notice thereof to
the concerned court.



                                                                      164
           (9)    After receiving the notice referred to in sub-section (8),
     the concerned court shall accordingly void or update the records
     thereof.

           (10) The judgment of the concerned court shall not be voided
     by the reason of pardon, alteration or reduction of the sentence
     imposed on any person granted by the President pursuant to this
     Section, and it shall not affect in any manner the sentence already
     served or fine or claimed amount already paid by such person.

           (11) The Government of Nepal may make necessary
     standards for the purpose of making proposal or recommendation
     pursuant to sub-sections (3) and (7).

160. Records to be voided: (1) The court shall, in the following
     circumstance, void the records of sentence established pursuant to
     sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 151, by setting out the reasons
     therefor:

                 (a)   If the sentence of imprisonment has been served by
                       the offender pursuant to this Chapter,

                 (b)   If the sentence of imprisonment has been served by
                       the offender by labor pursuant to the law in force,

                 (c)   If the sentence of imprisonment or punishment is
                       remitted due to the death of the offender as
                       mentioned in Section 158,

                 (d)   If the sentence of imprisonment has been served by
                       the offender in a reform home or community center
                       or by doing community service in accordance with
                       the law in force,



                                                                        165
            (e)    If the sentence imposed on the offender is pardoned
                   in whole pursuant to Section 159,

            (f)    If the offender pays the full amount for the fine or
                   claimed amount or compensation pursuant to this
                   Chapter, or

            (g)    If amount in lieu of imprisonment or sentence or
                   claimed amount or compensation imposed on the
                   offender is recovered pursuant to this Chapter.

      (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if any person, who is sentenced to imprisonment or required to
undergo imprisonment for a fine or government claimed amount or
any other amount in accordance with the law in force, fails to appear
in the court or to undergo imprisonment in the prison or cannot be
arrested until the following period, the court shall void the records of
sentence established in the case of such person:

             (a)    Fifty years in the case of the sentence of
                    imprisonment for life,

             (b)    Forty years in the case of the sentence of
                    imprisonment for a term exceeding ten years,

             (c)    Thirty years in the case of the sentence of
                    imprisonment for a term of five to ten years,

             (d)    Twenty years in the case of the sentence of
                    imprisonment for a term of one to five years,

             (e)    Twelve years in the case of the sentence of
                    imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.




                                                                     166
           (3)    If a person whose record is voided pursuant to sub-
     section (2) is found after the expiry of the said period, the court shall
     execute the judgment in accordance with this Chapter as if the record
     were not voided in the case of him or her.

           (4)    In voiding the record pursuant to sub-section (2), the
     property belonging to that person, if any, attached pursuant to this
     Act, shall be forfeited and auctioned, and the proceeds of sale by
     auction shall be credited to the consolidated fund.

           (5)    No person whose record has been voided by the reason
     of the non-completion of the service of sentence pursuant to this
     Section shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the law in force,
     be eligible to be appointed, nominated, designated or elected to any
     public office until such person serves such sentence pursuant to the
     judgment awarding the sentence.

161. Period of detention undergone to be set off against sentence of
     imprisonment: (1) If a person who, on conviction, is sentenced to
     imprisonment by a court judgment, has remained in detention or
     custody in the course of investigation, the period of such detention or
     custody shall be set off against the term of imprisonment imposed on
     him or her by the judgment, and such offender shall be imprisoned
     only for the remaining term of imprisonment.

           (2)    If any offender who is not sentenced to imprisonment
     but to a fine only has remained in detention or custody in the course
     of investigation, the total amount to be set by three hundred rupees a
     day of the period of his or her detention or custody shall be set off
     against the amount of fine payable by him or her.




                                                                          167
162. Execution of sentence of fine: (1) Every person who is required to
      pay a fine in accordance with the records established pursuant to
      Section 151 shall pay the fine immediately.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      if such person is not able to immediately pay the amount of fine but
      furnishes a property as the guarantee for the payment of such
      amount, the court may order that the amount of fine be paid up
      within one year in a maximum of three installments.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
      if the person so sentenced to fine has furnished any bail/bond or
      guarantee pursuant to Chapter 7 or Section 137, the court shall order
      that the amount of fine be recovered from such bail/bond or
      guarantee and only the remaining amount be paid in installments.

            (4)    Except in cases where the provision of payment of the
      amount of fine in installments is made pursuant to sub-section (2) or
      the service of sentence has already been made by remaining in
      detention or custody in the course of the proceedings of the case or
      the amount of fine is recoverable from the bail/bond or guarantee
      furnished pursuant to Chapter 7 or Section 137, the court shall order
      the concerned prison to imprison the offender in lieu of the fine if he
      or she fails to pay the amount of fine immediately.

             (5)   If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (4) and the
      offender who fails to pay the amount of fine pays some amount of
      fine or if the offender has remained in custody or detention in the
      course of the proceedings of the case and there is a situation that the
      period of such custody or detention undergone by him or her is to be
      set off against the period of imprisonment, the period of


                                                                         168
     imprisonment in the default of payment of the amount of fine shall
     be set by setting off the said period of imprisonment undergone, and
     the offender shall be imprisoned only for the remaining period in
     proportion to the period so set and the total amount of the fine.

163. Provisions relating to government claimed amount or other
     amount: (1) If a judgment decrees that the claimed amount be
     recovered, the recovery of a government claimed amount shall have
     priority over the recovery of a personal claimed amount.

           Provided that if any judgment has been made to recover a
     personal claimed amount before making the judgment to the effect
     that a governmental claimed amount be recovered, no priority shall
     be given to the government claimed amount.

           (2)    If the government claimed amount or other amount has
     not been recovered pursuant to the judgment or there is a situation
     that such amount cannot be recovered, except where the property
     belonging to the offender liable to pay such claimed amount or other
     amount has already been attached previously, such property shall be
     attached as soon as possible after the passage of the judgment.

           (3)    If the offender fails to pay the claimed amount or other
     amount referred to in sub-section (1) within thirty days from the date
     on which the judgment becomes final, such amount shall be
     recovered, in the case of a movable property attached pursuant to
     sub-section (2), by receiving such movable property from the body
     holding it, and in the case of an immovable property so attached, by
     auctioning such immovable property.




                                                                         169
          (4)    Such person shall be imprisoned for the government
    claimed amount that has not been recovered even from the proceeds
    of the auction of the property pursuant to sub-section (3).

164. Imprisonment for government claimed amount: (1) The
    concerned person shall pay any government claimed amount or any
    other amount held by a court judgment to be recoverable.

          (2)    If such person fails to pay the government claimed
    amount or other amount referred to in sub-section (1), such amount
    shall be recovered by forfeiting his or her property.

          (3)    If any government claimed amount or other amount
    could not be recovered even by making forfeiture referred to in sub-
    section (2), the sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
    the following term for the following claimed amount or such amount
    shall be set for such person:

                 (a)    One month for the claimed amount of five
                        thousand to ten thousand rupees,

                 (b)    Three months for the claimed amount of ten
                        thousand to twenty-five thousand rupees,

                 (c)    Six months for the claimed amount of twenty-five
                        thousand to fifty thousand rupees,

                 (d)    One year for the claimed amount of fifty
                        thousand to one hundred thousand rupees,

                 (e)    Six months for every fifty thousand rupees over
                        one hundred thousand rupees.




                                                                    170
          (4)      One shall be sentenced to imprisonment for an amount
    less than that set forth in clause (a) of sub-section (3) in a manner to
    set off three hundred rupees for each day.

          (5)      Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
    Section, in sentencing to imprisonment for a government claimed
    amount, such sentence of imprisonment shall not be set to exceed
    seven years.

165. Procedures for recovering personal claimed amount or
    compensation: (1) A person shall pay such personal claimed amount
    held to be payable by him or her, compensation or other amount to
    which the victim or his or her successor is entitled under the
    judgment of a court to the person who is entitled to get such payment
    within six months from the date of judgment.

          (2)      If such person fails to pay such claimed amount,
    compensation or amount within the period referred to in sub-section
    (1), he or she shall be liable to a fine not exceeding ten thousand
    rupees.

          (3)      If the person required to pay such claimed amount,
    compensation or other amount within the period referred to in sub-
    section (1), the person who is entitled to the recovery of such
    claimed amount, compensation or other amount may make a petition
    within three years from the date of final judgment, showing the
    property owned by the person liable to pay such claimed amount,
    compensation or other amount.

          (4)      If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
    court shall cause such claimed amount, compensation or other




                                                                        171
amount to be recovered respectively by attaching and auctioning the
said property.

      (5)    If the person liable to pay a claimed amount,
compensation or other amount pursuant to sub-section (1) pays the
same to the court or if the claimed amount, compensation or other
amount is recovered from the bail/bond or guarantee if any,
furnished pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 68, recovery shall be
made accordingly.

      (6)    If the person entitled to the recovery of a claimed
amount, compensation or other amount is not able to find the
property within the period referred to in sub-section (3), the court
shall abate the petition, subject to the execution of recovery if he or
she gives intimation as and when such property is found.

      (7)    If the claimed amount, compensation or other amount
could not be recovered pursuant to sub-section (4), the person
entitled to recover the remaining claimed amount, compensation or
other amount which could not be so recovered may make a petition
for imprisoning the offender, within thirty days from the date of
auction sale of the property of the offender or the date of abatement
of the petition pursuant to sub-section (6).

      (8)    If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (7), the
court shall convert the remaining claimed amount or other amount
into the term of imprisonment at the rate of three hundred rupees a
day, and the person liable to pay such claimed amount or other
amount shall be imprisoned accordingly.




                                                                   172
      (9)     While imprisoning any person pursuant to sub-section
(8), such person shall not be imprisoned for more than two years in
the case of a claimed amount of a particular person and for more than
four years in the case of a claimed amount of a public body under
full or majority ownership or control of the Government of Nepal,
State Government or Local Level.

      Provided that while imprisoning any person for the non-
recovery of compensation, such person may be imprisoned for up to
four years.

      (10) While imprisoning any person for a personal claimed
amount, compensation or other amount pursuant to sub-section (8), if
the claimed amount remains or is less than three hundred rupees,
such person shall be imprisoned for one day for the same.

      (11) While imprisoning any person pursuant to sub-section
(8), the Government of Nepal shall bear such ration expenses as
should be provided under law.

      (12) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the person required to pay a claimed amount,
compensation or other amount is held to have concealed or converted
in any manner his or her property within the period set forth in sub-
section (1) or (3), twenty-five percent of such property shall devolve
on one who discovers it, the remaining shall be used to pay the
claimed amount, compensation or other amount and further
remaining     shall   be   deposited   in   the   consolidated   fund,
notwithstanding anything contained in the law in force.




                                                                  173
166. Recovery of amount under judgment from bail/bond: (1)
    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if any
    offender has furnished any amount as a bail/bond pursuant to this
    Act, the fine, claimed amount, compensation or other amount
    payable by him or her by virtue of the judgment shall be recovered or
    caused to be recovered from that amount of bail/bond to the extent it
    is covered by such amount of bail/bond.

          (2)    In making recovery pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall
    be made in order of the following priority:

                 (a)     Fine,

                 (b)     Claimed amount,

                 (c)     Compensation,

                 (d)     Any other amount, if any.

          (3)    If    the   full   recovery   of   the   claimed   amount,
    compensation or other amount cannot be made, or caused to be
    made, from the amount referred to in sub-section (1), only the
    remainder of the recoverable amount shall be recovered, or caused to
    be recovered, upon taking action pursuant to this Chapter.

          (4)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
    Chapter, except where any offender pays immediately the fine,
    claimed amount, compensation or other amount required to be paid
    by him or her pursuant to the judgment or its recovery can be made
    pursuant to sub-section (1), the fine, compensation or other amount
    shall be recovered by auctioning the property, if any, furnished as
    security/guarantee by him or her or by any other person on his or her
    behalf in accordance with this Act.



                                                                        174
             (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
       Section, if any other person has provided his or her property as a
       bail/bond or guarantee in favour of any offender, before auctioning
       the property of such other person, the court shall give a notice to him
       or her to pay the fine, claimed amount, compensation or other
       amount payable pursuant to the judgment within forty-five days, and
       if such person pays such amount within the said time, the property up
       to the limit of his or her bail/bond or guarantee shall be released.

             (6)    In the case of the remainder of the amount which cannot
       be recovered from the property referred to in sub-section (3), it shall
       be recovered by auctioning the offender’s other property; and while
       so making recovery, recovery shall be made in priority referred to in
       sub-section (2).

              (7)   If the offender's partition share has not been set aside
       for the purpose of making auction pursuant to sub-section (6),
       auction shall be made by setting aside his or her partition share in
       accordance with law.

167.   Procedures for attachment, forfeiture or control of property:
       (1) While attaching, forfeiting or taking control of the property of
       any offender pursuant to this Act, the concerned court shall follow
       the following procedures:

                    (a)    If the property is being registered or licensed
                           separately, to give a notice of attachment to the
                           office responsible for registering, transmitting,
                           issuing or renewing the license,




                                                                              175
             (b)   If the property is cash, to give a notice of
                   attachment to the body holding such cash,

             (c)   If the property is that crops or rent can be
                   harvested in or collected from it, the court shall
                   order the concerned Local Level to collect such
                   corps or rent and pay the amount into the deposit
                   account,

             (d)   If it is the property subject to speedy decay or
                   spoil or livestock, the court shall cause such
                   property to be auctioned and the proceeds of such
                   auction to be paid into the deposit account.

      (2)    While attaching the property of any person pursuant to
this Act, if that person has lent a loan to anyone else or invested it,
the court shall issue an order to the borrower restraining him or her
from realizing the principal amount, interest or any other return of
the said loan or investment.

      (3)    The court shall require the borrower to pay to it the
principal amount, interest, return or similar other amount of the loan
or investment referred to in sub-section (2).

       (4)   If any other person has right in the property attached
pursuant to this Section, such person may make a complaint to the
court making attachment within thirty-five days from the date of
knowledge of such attachment, by showing his or her right in that
property.

      (5)    If a complaint is made pursuant to sub-section (4), the
court shall decide as to the right in the property if it is empowered by



                                                                    176
     law to make such decision and shall forward the complaint to the
     proper court, if it has no such power.

           (6)     If the court makes any decision pursuant to sub-section
     (5), a person who is not satisfied with such decision may make an
     appeal in accordance with law.

168. To appoint date for appearance for recovery of claimed amount,
     compensation or other amount: (1) While appointing a date for
     appearance for causing the recovery of the claimed amount,
     compensation or other amount pursuant to the judgment, the date for
     appearance shall be appointed, by indicating the purpose for which
     the date is so appointed.

           Provided that the government party shall not be required to be
     on recognizance for a government claimed amount or compensation.

           (2)     If the person entitled to have recovery does not appear
     on the date for appearance appointed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     recovery proceedings shall be postponed on that day.

           (3)     If the person entitled to have recovery of the claimed
     amount, compensation or other amount makes a petition, showing a
     reasonable reason for his or her absence on the date appointed for
     appearance pursuant to sub-section (1), to the court within fifteen
     days, such claimed amount, compensation or other amount as is
     recoverable to such person under the judgment shall be recovered to
     him or her.

           (4)     If the person who is entitled to have recovery of the
     claimed amount, compensation or other amount and does not appear
     on the date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) fails to make a



                                                                      177
petition within the period referred to in sub-section (2), the recovery
of such claimed amount, compensation or other amount shall be
abated for one year.

      (5)    If the concerned person makes appearance within the
period referred to in sub-section (4), the recovery of the claimed
amount, compensation or other amount recoverable under the
judgment shall be made.

      (6)    If the concerned person fails to appear within the period
referred to in sub-section (4), no action shall thereafter be taken in
relation to the recovery of such claimed amount, compensation or
other amount.




                                                                   178
                                   Chapter-16

                                 Miscellaneous

169. Cases to be tried by District Court: The case trying authority, if
      any, designated by the Government of Nepal, by a notification in the
      Nepal Gazette, shall try any of such cases set forth in the Penal Code,
      and the District Court shall try the other cases.

170. Priority order for trying cases: (1) The court shall proceed, hear
      and adjudicate cases as per the following order of priority:

               (a)     A case to which a person held in detention in the
                       course of investigation is a party,

               (b)     A case to which a person remanded in custody for
                       trial is a party,

               (c)     A case to which a person held in imprisonment is a
                       party,

               (d)     A case to which a person with disability or a child is a
                       party,

               (e)     A case to which a person with physical disability or a
                       person of over seventy-five years of age is a party,

               (e)     A case relating to violence against woman,

               (f)     A case which is accorded priority in proceeding or
                       hearing pursuant to law,

               (g)     A case registered earlier according to the order of
                       registration of cases.

            (2)      While proceeding and adjudicating any case involving
      any other persons, in addition to those mentioned in clauses (a), (b)


                                                                              179
     or (c) of sub-section (1), as parties, proceeding, hearing and
     adjudication shall be made also in the case of such persons.

              (3)   Out of the cases in which more than one person who are
     remanded in detention or custody are parties, the case of the person
     who has been held in detention or custody earlier shall be proceeded,
     heard and adjudicated first.

              (4)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
     (2) and (3), the court may, in view of the gravity and propriety of any
     case, proceed, hear and adjudicated such case by according priority
     to it.

171. Index of documents: There shall be maintained an index of
     documents in each case in the form referred to in Schedule-50, and
     such index shall record the serial number and description of the
     documents, according to the order of the date of registration.

172. Disposal of documents: After the completion of five years of the
     final decision of a case, the court shall dispose the documents other
     than the following documents enclosed in the case-file of the said
     case:

              (a)   Complaint, charge sheet or plaint,

              (b)   Statement of the accused or the note of defense,

              (c)   Statement equivalent to the note of defense,

              (d)   Originals of evidence,

              (e)   Memorandum of appeal, if any,

              (f)   Petition for review or revision of the case, if any,

              (g)   Judgment or final decision made by the court,



                                                                           180
            (h)    Map, inventory form, statements of property,

            (i)    Such other documents as considered necessary to be
                   preserved in accordance with law.

            Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "final
      decision” means the decision made by the appeal hearing court in
      relation to a judgment appealed for, and the decision made by the
      court competent to make sanction in relation to a reference judgment.

173. Document to be translated: (1) If any document written in any
      language other than the Nepali language is submitted to the court in
      the form of evidence, the court may, as required, order the party who
      has submitted such document to submit an authentic translation of
      the document in the Nepali language.

            (2)    The concerned party as ordered by the court pursuant to
      sub-section (1) shall make translation of such document in the Nepali
      language and submit its certified copy to the court.

            (3)    If there arises any dispute as to the translation referred
      to in sub-section (2), the court may summon the presence of and
      examine any expert in such matter.

174. Assistance of interpreter may be taken: (1) If it is required to take
      statement or deposition of any accused or witness who is unable to
      understand or speak the Nepali language or for any other purpose,
      the investigating authority, prosecutor or the court may take
      assistance of an interpreter of the concerned language or the sign
      language.




                                                                         181
            (2)         The Government of Nepal shall bear the expenses
      incurred in taking assistance of the interpreter pursuant to sub-
      section (1).

175. Copies to be provided: (1) The concerned party to a case or his or
      her law practitioner may obtain a copy of any document contained in
      the case-file of any case, by paying such fees as provided by law.

            Provided that any law practitioner may obtain the copy of a
      judgment.

            (2)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      no copy of a document that has to be kept confidential pursuant to
      law shall be provided.

176. Not to try case involving conflict of interest: (1) No judge shall
      proceed, hear and adjudicate any of the following cases:

                  (a)      A case involving right, interest or concern of him or
                           her or his or her close relative,

                           Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the
                           term “close relative” means a person who is, by
                           relation, entitled to succeed to his or her property
                           upon his or her death or maternal uncle, maternal
                           aunt, mother's elder sister, mother's younger sister,
                           mother's elder sister's husband, mother's younger
                           sister's   husband,    mother-in-law,   father-in-law,
                           father’s sister, father’s sister's husband, elder
                           brother-in-law, younger brother-in-law, elder sister-
                           in-law, younger sister-in-law, elder sister, younger
                           sister, elder sister's husband, younger sister's



                                                                             182
                  husband, daughter-in-law, nephew, niece, niece's
                  husband, niece's daughter-in-law, maternal grand-
                  father, maternal grand-mother or any person having
                  such relation in the family.

            (b)   A case in which he or she has become an attorney,
                  law practitioner or witness on any occasion,

            (c)   A case which he or she, in capacity of the judge, has
                  decided or made a final order therein in any court,

            (d)   A case in which he or she has given opinion as to
                  whether or not to institute it on any occasion,

            (e)   A case involving, for any other reason, a substantial
                  interest of him or her or any of his or her joint family
                  members.

      (2)     If there appears any circumstance referred to in sub-
section (1), the judge shall make order, setting out the reason
therefor, to the effect that he or she cannot try the case.

      (3)     If any judge proceeds to try, hear or adjudicate any case
in a manner contrary to sub-section (1), any party may make a
petition, accompanied by necessary evidence, for not so trying,
hearing or adjudicating the case.

      (4)     If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
judge shall, before proceeding, hearing or adjudicating the case,
make decision as to whether the claim of such petition is reasonable
or not.

      (5)     If, while making decision pursuant to sub-section (4),
the claim of petition appears reasonable or the judge himself or


                                                                        183
      herself has made order pursuant to sub-section (2) that he or she
      should not proceed, hear or settle the case, such case shall be referred
      to another judge, if any, in the same court and in absence of such
      judge, submission shall be made to the appeal hearing court for the
      transfer of the case in accordance with sub-section (3) of Section 96.

177. Acts to be done by judge himself or herself: (1) The judge himself
      or herself shall do the following acts, out of the acts to be done by
      the court pursuant to this Act:

            (a)    Taking and recording a statement or deposition of the
                   accused or of a witness,

            (b)    Taking an oath of a witness,

            (c)    Issuing order for remanding in custody or on bail/bond
                   or guarantee,

            (d)    Executing a memorandum of orders on matters to be
                   decided in the case,

            (e)    Issuing an order for the examination of evidence,

            (f)    Issuing an interim or interlocutory order,

            (g)    Hearing of the case,

            (g)    Holding preliminary and pre-trial discussion in the case,

            (i)    Issuing any other kind of order as required,

            (j)    Passing a judgment or final order.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      the following matters may be carried out as follows:




                                                                          184
            (a)    An employee in the court whose rank is at least non-
                   gazette first class may record the evidence or deposition
                   of a witness, at the direction of the judge.

            (b)    In the absence of the judge, the senior-most employee
                   out of the employees present in the court may make an
                   order pursuant to Chapter 6 in respect of taking
                   depositions of the accused or remanding him or her in
                   custody or taking a bail/bond or guarantee from him or
                   her.

                          Provided that the order made pursuant to this
                   clause shall be submitted to the judge immediately
                   when the judge attends the court, and the judge may,
                   upon examining it, uphold, void or amend that order.

            (3)    The acts other than those contained in sub-section (1) or
      (2) may be done by any employee subordinate to the judge, at the
      direction or on the order of the latter.

178. Procedure to be followed for releasing detainee or prisoner: (1) If
      any detainee or prisoner has to be released pursuant to the judgment
      or order of the court, the court shall send such order stating the
      reasons for release, full name and address of the detainee or prisoner
      and detail of the case to the concerned prison.

            (2)    Upon receipt of the order referred to in sub-section (1),
      the concerned prison shall immediately release the detainee or
      prisoner in pursuance of such order.

            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1)
      and (2), if any detainee or prisoner to be released pursuant to the



                                                                          185
     judgment or order is present in the court, he or she shall, upon
     judgment, be released immediately and a notice thereof shall be
     given to the concerned prison.

179. To give notice on release of property subject to attachment: In
     releasing any property attached in accordance with this Act pursuant
     to the court judgment or order, the court shall give a notice thereof to
     the concerned office and the person responsible for such attachment.

180. Pleading and appeal to be made by government attorney: (1) The
     government attorney shall, on behalf of the Government of Nepal,
     plead and defend the cases related to the offences under Schedule-1
     and Schedule-2.

           (2)    The concerned authority shall file and appeal cases
     related to the offences under Schedule-3, and the concerned
     government attorney shall, if so requested, defend such cases.

           (3)    The government attorney shall, while pleading cases,
     plead them as per the prevailing norms on professional conduct.

           (4)    Except as otherwise provided in the law in force, the
     government attorney shall have power to make appeal against or file
     a petition for the review or revision of, any judgment or order passed
     or made by the court in any case referred to in sub-section (1) in the
     event of not being satisfied with such judgment or order.

           (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
     Section, if it is necessary that any particular case, in which the
     Government of Nepal is plaintiff, be pleaded by any other law
     practitioner in addition to the government attorney, the concerned
     body shall, assigning the reason therefor, obtain consent of the



                                                                         186
     Attorney General or the government attorney authorized by him or
     her for the same.

            (6)   Upon receiving the consent pursuant to sub-section (5),
     such body may appoint another law practitioner.

            (7)   The law practitioner appointed pursuant to sub-section
     (6) shall plead the case, subject to the general direction by the
     Attorney General or the government attorney authorized by him or
     her.

181. Power of government attorney to make complaint: If any decision
     or order made by any judicial or quasi-judicial body has an effect in
     the title, interest or concern of the Government of Nepal and there is
     no authority specified by law to file the case, make appeal or review
     petition or make a complaint or petition in any other manner against
     such order or decision, the Attorney General or the government
     attorney designated by him or her may, subject to law, make a
     complaint, appeal or review or other petition to the concerned
     authority against such decision or order on that matter.

182. To register document tendered for registration in court: (1) The
     court shall immediately register a document tendered for registration
     in it and give a receipt thereof if the document is found to meet the
     requirements of the law.

            (2)   If a document tendered for registration pursuant to sub-
     section (1) is not found to meet the requirements of the law, the court
     shall return the document, by making endorsement setting out its
     failure to meet the requirements.




                                                                        187
          (3)       If, in relation to the matters of a document returned
    upon making endorsement pursuant to sub-section (2), the document
    is made to meet the requirements as set out by endorsement and is
    tendered for registration within the statute of limitation or time-limit
    or within seven days after the date of endorsement if that date is the
    deadline for the registration of such document, it shall be registered
    and proceeded with in accordance with law.

183. Identity of victim or witness may be kept secret: (1)
    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if the
    investigation authority thinks that the disclosure of the identity of a
    person who is a victim or witness of any particular offence may be
    prejudicial to the social prestige or honor of such person or witness
    or may result in undue fear, terror or fright by the accused or other
    party or be prejudicial to his or her body or life, the authority may
    make a request to the court, through the government attorney, that
    the name, surname, address of such person or witness or the name of
    his or her father or any other description which may disclose his or
    her identity be kept secret.

          (2)       If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
    court may order that the name, surname and address of such victim
    or witness and his or her father's name or his or her identity be kept
    secret.

              (3)   In disclosing the name, surname, address of the person
    or his or her father's name having been kept secret pursuant to sub-
    section (1) at the time of hearing of the concerned case or publishing
    details pertaining thereto, such disclosure shall be made under fake




                                                                        188
    name, surname, address or father's name, pursuant to the order of the
    court.

184. Deposition, document or deed made or executed before
    investigating authority may be recorded in audio-visual means:
    (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the
    investigating authority may, in the following circumstance, record, or
    cause to be recorded, the deposition, document or deed of a victim of
    an offence, informant or witness through any audio-visual means, in
    the presence of the government attorney:

             (a)   If the investigating authority has a reasonable reason to
                   believe that the accused may, by way of putting undue
                   influence on, or showing fear, terror, intimidation or
                   threat to the victim of an offence, the informant or any
                   witness, prevent such victim, informant or witness from
                   appearing before the court or compel him or her to make
                   statement or deposition contrary to the statement or
                   document which he or she has made or executed before
                   the investigating authority, in spite of his or her
                   appearance in the court,

             (b)   If such person, informant or witness is, owing to
                   physical infirmity or being a child, not able to appear
                   before the police office or government attorney office,

             (c)   If any thing to be submitted to the court as evidence
                   cannot be taken to the court from the place where that
                   thing is situated.




                                                                        189
           (2)    The court may admit in evidence the audio-video means
     recorded pursuant to sub-section (1).

185. Performance of activities by higher level employee: (1) Any
     function or duty that is required to be or may be performed by any
     government attorney, police officer or any other officer pursuant to
     this Act may also be performed by such government attorney of
     higher level or of the same level as designated by the Attorney
     General or by such police employee of higher level or of the same
     level as designated by the Inspector General of Police or by any
     other officer of higher level or of the same level in the concerned
     office.

           (2)    Any function or duty performed pursuant to sub-section
     (1) shall be deemed to have been performed by the competent
     authority.

186. Receipt to be taken or given: (1) While returning any document
     registered in the court to any person or handing over any document
     by the court to any person, a receipt or proof to the effect that such
     document has been so returned or handed over shall be executed or
     taken and enclosed in the case-file.

           (2)    The court shall, while receiving any document
     submitted by any person to it, give a receipt thereof to that person.

187. To make assistance in witnessing and giving signature or thumb
     impression: (1) If any person is bound to witness any act in the
     course of proceedings or affixing signature or thumb impression on a
     document prepared by the court pursuant to this Act, such person




                                                                         190
shall assist the court by so being witness or affixing signature or
thumb impression on such document.

       (2)   If any person bound to witness any act or affix signature
or thumb impression on any document pursuant to sub-section (1)
refuses to do so, the employee executing that act or document may
sign and execute such document, by taking signature or thumb
impression of any other two persons present, setting out that matter
and remarks, along with the reason for the failure of such person to
witness or sign the document.

      (3)    Any document executed pursuant to sub-section (2)
shall be deemed to have been executed in fulfillment of the
requirements specified by law.

      (4)    If any person bound to affix his or her signature or
thumb impression on any document executed before the court refuses
to do so, the judge shall set out the matter, mention remarks in the
document and sign it.

      (5)    If any person does not assist the court by omitting to
witness any act or to affix signature or thumb impression on any
document under this Section, the court may fine such person with a
maximum of five thousand rupees.

      (6)    If any person, when affixing his or her signature or
thumb impression on a document pursuant to this Act, expresses his
or her disagreement over any matter contained in the document, he
or she may affix his or her signature or thumb impression on it,
separately stating his or her remarks.




                                                                  191
188. Action not to be instituted: (1) No question shall be raised nor any
      case instituted in any court in respect of any decision, prosecution,
      pleading and defense made by the government attorney in relation to
      any case pursuant to this Act.

              (2)   No action may be taken in respect of any act done or
      action taken in good faith by the investigating authority in relation to
      the investigation of any of the offences under Schedule-1 and
      Schedule-2.

189. Provision of investigating committee: (1) Notwithstanding
      anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the following committee
      shall investigate into a complaint filed in relation to the offence
      investigated or prosecuted dishonestly as referred to in Section 99 of
      the Penal Code:

        (a)     Joint Attorney General of at least gazetted -Chairperson
                first class designated by the Attorney General

        (b)     At least gazetted first class officer of the
                Government of Nepal, as designated by the
                Government of Nepal
                                                                 -Member

        (c)     At least gazetted first class officer of the
                Nepal    Police,   as   designated    by   the -Member
                Government of Nepal

              (2)   If, in conducting investigation, the committee referred
      to in sub-section (1) finds that such investigation or prosecution has
      been conducted or made dishonestly, it shall write to the concerned
      government attorney office to institute the case in relation thereto.


                                                                              192
190. Power to grant permission to take over case: If, in any case of the
      offence under Schedule-4 involving the recovery of any kind of
      movable or immovable property, other than a case involving the
      recovery of a claimed amount or sentence of imprisonment or fine,
      the complainant dies or becomes of unsound mind or goes away and
      the time-limit and the date appointed for appearance by the court get
      expired, and his or her successor makes a petition for the extension
      of the time-limit and appointed date for appearance, within thirty-
      five days from the date of his or her death, being of unsound mind or
      going away, excluding the time required for journey, the court may
      issue an order extending the expired time-limit and appointed date
      for appearance.

191. Mutual legal assistance may be effected: If a summons or warrant
      for arrest has to be issued to, or any evidence to be taken from, any
      offender of a case related to any offence to be proceeded, heard and
      adjudicated pursuant to this Act who is in a foreign country or it is
      necessary to assist in the service of a summons or warrant for arrest
      on, or take any evidence from, any accused of a case sub judice in a
      foreign court, who is in Nepal, the matter shall be dealt with in
      accordance with the mutual legal assistance law.

192. Documents may be exchanged through electronic means: The
      documents referred to in this Act may be exchanged through
      electronic means in accordance with the law in force related to
      electronic transactions.

193. Not to be affected by printing or mathematical error: If there is
      any mathematical or other minor error or omission in writing or
      printing in respect of the procedures under this Act, while conducting



                                                                        193
     investigation, prosecution and other proceeding of a case under this
     Act, all acts and proceedings related thereto shall not be deemed
     illegal by that reason alone.

194. Coordination committee: (1) There shall be a coordination
     committee as follows, in order to bring effectiveness in the
     investigation and prosecution of cases of offences under Schedule-1
     or Schedule-2, by making coordination, as required, between the
     bodies involved in such investigation and prosecution:

          (a)     Attorney General                            -Chairperson

          (b)     Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and -Member
                  Parliamentary Affairs

          (c)     Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs         -Member

          (d)     Inspector General of Police, Nepal Police   -Member

          (e)     Such government attorney of gazetted first -Member
                  class level or above in the Office of secretary
                  Attorney General as designated by the
                  Attorney General

            (2)    The rules of procedures of the coordination committee
     shall be as determined by itself.

195. Departmental action to be taken: A public servant who fails to do
     act or take any action required to be done or taken pursuant to this
     Act within the period, if any, specified by this Act shall be liable to
     departmental action in accordance with law.




                                                                        194
196. Power to frame rules: (1) The Government of Nepal may, in
     consultation with the Attorney General, frame rules on matters of
     investigation, and the Supreme Court may frame rules on matters of
     court proceedings, for the implementation of this Act.

           (2)    While framing rules pursuant to sub-section (1), the
     Judicial Council shall be consulted on the matters pertaining to the
     administration of justice.

197. Power to frame directives: (1 In order to make acts to be carried
     out under this Act simple, clear and well managed, the following
     authority may, as required, make and enforce directives on the
     following matters:

           (a)    The Government of Nepal, on the advice of the
                  Attorney General, in respect of the investigation and
                  prosecution of cases of offences under Schedule-1 or
                  Schedule-2,

           (b)    The Attorney General in respect of the pleading,
                  defense or legal opinion in relation to the cases related
                  to offences under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2,

           (c)    The Supreme Court in respect of the service of
                  summons under Chapter 6,

           (d)    The Supreme Court in respect of the management of
                  court or bench;

           (e)    The Supreme Court in respect of the execution of
                  judgments under Chapter 15,




                                                                       195
           (f)    The Government of Nepal, in consultation with the
                  Attorney General, in respect of the withdrawal of cases
                  pursuant to Section 116,

           (g)    The Government of Nepal, in consultation with the
                  Attorney General, in respect of pardon pursuant to
                  Section 159,

           (h)    The Supreme Court in respect of the other court
                  proceedings.

           (2)    The directives referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
     deemed to have been issued under this Act.

198. Power to make alteration in Schedules: The Government of Nepal
     may, as required, make any alteration in or addition to or deletion
     from the offences set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, by a
     notification in the Nepal Gazette.




                                                                     196
                              Schedule -1

             (Relating to clauses (d) and (l) of Section 2)

1.   Offences under the following Chapters or under the following
     Sections of the following Chapters of the Penal Code:

     (a)   Part-2:

           (1)   Chapter-1

           (2)   Chapter-2

           (3)   Sections 92, 93, 94 and 102 of Chapter-4

           (4)   Sections 1104, 105, 106, 110, 114, 118, 119, 120, 121,
                 122, 123, 124, 125 and 126

           (5)   Chapter-6

           (6)   Chapter-7

           (7)   Sections 151 and 152 of Chapter-8

           (8)   Chapter-9

           (9)   Chapter-10

           (10) Chapter-11

           (11) Chapter-12

           (12) Chapter-13

           (13) Section 192 of Chapter-14

           (14) Chapter-15

           (15) Chapter-16

           (16) Chapter-17




                                                                   197
            (17) Sections 219, 221, 222, 223, 225, sub-section (3) of
                   Section 226 of Chapter-18

            (18) Chapter-19

            (19) Chapter-20

            (20) Clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 249 and
                   Sections 249, 250, 251, 252 and 253 of Chapter-21

            (21) Chapters-22 and 23

            (22) Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (3) of Section
                   276, and Section 278 of Chapter-25

            (23) Sections 283 (except personal property) and 287 of
                   Chapter-26

            (24) Chapter-27

2.    Attempt to, abetment of, conspiracy to any offence under serial
      number 1 above

3.    Offence relating to human trafficking and transportation

4.    Offence under the Postal Act, 2019

5.    Offence relating to citizenship

6.    Offence relating to ancient monuments

7.    Offence relating to narcotic drugs

8.    Offence under the Essential Services Operation Act, 2014

9.    Offence under Protection and Welfare of the Disabled Act, 2039

10.   Offence under the Act Relating to Secrecy of Documents, 2039

11.   Offence relating to passport




                                                                        198
12.   Offence relating to the protection of essential goods

13.   Offence under the Prison Act, 2019

14.   Offence under the Donation Act, 2025

15.   Offence under the Lottery Act, 2025

16.   Causing death of or grievous hurt or injury to any person by running
      over, hitting, blowing or accident by motor vehicle

17.   Offence under Section 9A. of the Civil Aviation Act, 2015

18.   Offence under Section 15 of the Press and Publication Act, 2048

19.   Offence of forgery or fraud resulted from any offence included in
      this Schedule

20.   Any such other offence as may be specified by the law in force to be
      included in this Schedule

21.   Any such offence as may be included in this Schedule by the
      Government of Nepal, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette




                                                                        199
                                Schedule-2

             (Relating to clauses (d) and (l) of Section 2)



1.   Offences under the following Sections of the following Chapter of
     the Penal Code:

           (a)   Sections 107, 108, 109, 111, 112 and 113 of Chapter-5
                 of Part-2

2.   Any criminal case, which is instituted with the Government of Nepal
     being plaintiff, or any offence of criminal nature in which the right,
     interest or concern of the Government of Nepal is vested, except that
     mentioned in Schedule-1.

3.   Such offence as may be included by the law in force in this
     Schedule.

4.   Such offence as may be specified to be tried and adjudicated under
     this Schedule, by the Government of Nepal, by a notification in the
     Nepal Gazette.

5.   Offence of attempt to, abetment of, conspiracy to, any offence under
     numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4, and any offence related thereto under Chapter
     11.




                                                                       200
                               Schedule-3

                  (Relating to clause (l) of Section 2)



1.   Offences under Chapter-3 of Part-2 of the Penal Code.

2.   Any criminal offence in which the Government of Nepal is
     concerned or in which the right, interest or concern of any
     constitutional body, court or public authority is vested, other than
     that set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2.




                                                                     201
                                Schedule-4

                     (Relating to part (l) of Section 2)

1.   Offences under the following Chapters or under the following
     Sections of the following Chapters of the Penal Code:

     (a)   Part-2:

           (1)    Chapter-14 except Section 192

           (2)    Chapter-15

           (3)    Sections 220, 224, and 226 of Chapter-18 (if a woman
                  of 18 years of age or above is involved)

           (4)    Clause (c) of sub-section (3) of Section 249, Sections
                  250 and 252 of Chapter-21 (if any organization other
                  than a person or Government of Nepal is plaintiff)

           (5)    Chapter-25, except clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-
                  section (3) of Section 276, and Section 277

           (6)    Sections 284, 286 and 287 of Chapter-26 (if a person is
                  plaintiff)

     (b)   Chapters-1 and 2 of Part 3

2.   Any criminal cases other than those mentioned in Schedule-1, 2 or 3.

3.   Any offences of criminal nature which are to be instituted with
     persons being plaintiff under the law in force.

4.   Offence of incest.

5.   Offences of attempt to, abetment of, conspiracy to, any offence under
     serial numbers 1, 2 and 3 above and any offences related thereto
     under Chapter-11.



                                                                       202
                                 Schedule-5

            (Relating to sub-sections (1) and (7) of Section 4)

                    Form of First Information Report



Report submitted to ………….

(Name and address of the police office)

                                         To be filled in by the police office:

                                                Registration No.:

                                                Registration date:

1.    Name, surname and address of the person making the first
      information report or notice:

2.    Law or case in respect whereof the information report or notice has
      been made:

3.    Name, surname and address (including street) of the person who has
      committed the offence:

4.    Name of father/mother of the person who has committed the offence:

5.    Special identifying features of the person who has committed the
      offence:

6,    Details relating to the offence:

            (a)    The place, date and time where and when the offence
                   has been committed or is being committed or going to
                   be committed:

            (b)    Details of the event relating to the offence:




                                                                             203
           (c)    Nature of the offence and other details related to the
                  offence:

           (d)    Proof, evidence related with the offence:

           (e)    Other details related to the offence:

8.   The contents of this report are true and correct; if proved false, I
     shall bear and pay according to law.

     If I receive a notice to appear during investigation into the case by
     the police or trial of the case by the court, I shall appear accordingly.



                           Person making first information report or notice:

                                                           Signature:

                                                           Date:




                                                                           204
                                Schedule-6

                 (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 4)

              Receipt of First Information Report or Notice



            Re: Concerning the offence related to--------------.

A report or notice dated--------------made by------------has been received
and entered in the register maintained by this police office on----------
(date).



Seal of the office:

Registration No.:                     Report or notice registering police
                                             employee:

                                                   Signature:

                                                   Name:

                                                   Designation:

                                                   Office:

                                                   Date:




                                                                        205
                                                                                                   Schedule-7
                                                                             (Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 4)
                                                                                         Offence Register
                                                                                       Government of Nepal
                                                                                     Ministry of Home Affairs
                                                                                    ……………. Police Office
Regd Type Designated     Date, time      Date and time of    Date and time of           Name,         Short         Description of     Name,       Name      Name,        Details of       Manner of       Goods or
No. of    investigating and place of      registration of departure and arrival of   surname of   description of    injury or hurt     surname,    and     surname and    accused        commission of   instruments
                          incident            report      police for and on spot      informant      the case                                      surname description    arrested          offence       used in the
     crime authority                                                                                                                   address,                                                          commission
                                                                                                                                       sex,        of        of accused                                   of offence
                                                                                                                                       occupation father of or suspect
                                                                                                                                        of victim accused
                                                                                                                                                   or
                                                                                                                                                   suspect
                                                                                                                   Death Hurt Others




       Witnesses and         Physical material                        Proceeding after investigation                         Date of           Judgment passed by court    Appeal made or         Remarks
    persons in witness of   evidence or exhibits                                                                           examination                                    not; if yes, date of
      deed of scene of                                                                                                      of witness
           crime
                                                       Date of      Proposed opinion    Charge framed by     Limitation
                                                   submission of       or advice of       governmental
                                                      report of       investigating     attorney and law
                                                    investigation       authority       pertaining thereto




                                                                                                                                                                                                              206
                                  Schedule-8

                  (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 9)

 Form of warrant for arrest to be issued with the approval of the court



Mr./Ms.----------------

Address (including street):--------------



Whereas, you have to be arrested in the course of investigation into the
offence of-------------------, this warrant for arrest is hereby issued pursuant
to the approval of the ……court, dated….. You are hereby required to
appear in person immediately, accompanied by the police employee carrying
this warrant for arrest, before--------office. Otherwise, the police will arrest
and produce you before-------office.

                                                      Investigating authority's:

                                                               Signature:

                                                                  Name:

                                                            Designation:

                                                                  Office:

                                                                   Date:




                                                                            207
                                   Schedule-9

                  (Relating to sub-section (6) of Section 9)

                     Form of Urgent Warrant for Arrest



Mr./Ms.----------------

Address (including street):--------------



Whereas, you have to be arrested in the course of investigation into the
offence of-------------------, this warrant for arrest is hereby issued.

                                                    Police employee's:

                                                        Name, surname:

                                                               Designation:

                                                               Date:




                                                                              208
                                       Schedule-10

                      (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 13)

                          Form of Warrant for Detention

Mr/Ms..................
Address............

        Whereas, it is required to try the case by holding you in police custody
in the course of investigation into the offence of......, on the
report/information of..............;
        Now, therefore, this warrant for detention is hereby issued for holding
you in police custody with effect from this date.


                                                     Investigating authority:
                                                            Signature:
                                                            Name:
                                                            Designation:
                                                            Office:
                                                            Date:




                                                                                209
                                  Schedule-11

                 (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 16)

  Form of document executed by person seeing, witnessing, hearing or
                             knowing the incident



Document      executed     by------------(person),   aged------,   carrying      on
………profession/occupation, son/daughter of-----------, a resident of---------
, before Mr./Ms.---------------investigating authority of-------police office.

   1.     Short description of the first information report or notice:



   2.     Questions in connection with the incident:




   3.     Matters set out by the person executing the document:



   4.     Presence:

                                  Signature of the document executing person:



   Done on -----------day, --------month of----------of the year-----------.




                                                                                 210
                                          Schedule-12

                     (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 18)

                         Form of Notice for Making Search

To,

       ---------------------------------
       --------------------------------
       Whereas, in the case related to the offence of-------------, in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff on the report of----------- and ------------ et.
al. is defendant, it is possible that the above-named accused might be
residing or staying in, or hiding any thing, good or instrument used by him
or her in the commission of the offence or connected with the offence in,-----
----(place);

       Now, therefore, I hereby give this notice to you to search the said
house, place.

I request for assistance in the above act.

                                                        Investigating authority:

                                                         Date:




                                                                             211
                                        Schedule-13

                      (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 18)

                             Form of Search/Seizure Deed



     Deed of search of thing/place/body of person and seizure of thing
     executed at Ward No……, ….Village Body/Municipality--------(place)
     by the Police Office--------------.

1.      Short description of the first information report or notice:

        ---------------------------------------------------------------------
2.      If it is required to make a prior search of the authority or employee
        making search or seizure, details of such prior search made:

        ---------------------------------------------------------------------
3.      Description and boundaries of the place where the thing/ place/person
        has been searched or seized:

        ---------------------------------------------------------------------
4.      Description of the seized thing or exhibit related to the offence:

        ---------------------------------------------------------------------
5.      Name, surname, age, address and signature of every eye witness:

        (a)

        (b)

        (c)

6.      Name, surname, age, address and signature of the person in whose
        presence the deed is executed:

                                                                                212
        (a)    The owner or person in charge of the house or thing, a
               resident      of-------Ward        No….,         …….Village
               Body/Municipality, ……….District, signing it covenanting
               that the investigating authority has offered himself or herself
               to be searched before making search of my body, my house
               and thing, and that he or she has made search with dignity
               and no goods in the house have been misappropriated.

        (b)    Name, surname, age, address and signature of the informant:

        (c)    Name, surname, age, address and signature of the accused
               person:

     The investigating authority deputed to execute the act including
     search, seizure:

     Other employees:

7.   Date:

8.   Time:




                                                                          213
                                     Schedule-14

                   (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 20)

                Deed on Scene of Crime/Corpse Examination



Deed on scene of crime/corpse examination executed in------------- (place)
by the police office----------------

1.     Name, surname, description of the deceased:

       Address:

       Age:

       Sex:

2.     Short description of the report or notice:

       ---------------------------------------------------------------------
       ---------------------------------------------------------------------
       ---------------------------------------------------------------------
3.     Description and boundaries of the scene of crime:
       ---------------------------------------------------------------------
       ---------------------------------------------------------------------
       ---------------------------------------------------------------------
4.     Description of the corpse:

       Physical condition of the corpse: (mention the details)

       Description of the corpse:

       Clothes- (including other physical materials on the body)

       Height

       Color of hair                                 Condition of hair

                                                                               214
Condition of face

Eyes: Open/closed

Nose                                  Ear

Mouth                                 Teeth and tongue

Condition of throat

Hands: Stretched or not

Condition of nail

Condition of legs

Other conditions

Bruises:

(Site, size and measurement)

Abrasion:

(Site, size and measurement)

Cut wounds:

(Site, size)

Throat abrasion:

Other sites (Site, size and measurement)

Chest

Condition of the other parts of stomach

Anal

Penis, vagina



                                                         215
Identifying marks, if any:

Other deformities/unusual symptoms, if any:

Sketch of the scene of crime and the corpse (if it can be made):

Names, surnames, ages, addresses and signatures of eye witnesses:

----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Names, surnames, ages, addresses and signatures of persons in whose
presence the deed is executed:

---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Name, surname, age, address and signature of the informant:

Names, surnames, ages, addresses and signatures of the accused
persons:

Served by:

Investigating authority:

Other police employees:

----------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------
Date:




                                                                         216
                              Schedule-15

             (Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 20)

                            Autopsy Report

1.    Case registration number:
2.    Police office sending for autopsy (letter date and reference
      number):
3.    Name of the deceased:
4.    Address:
5.    Gender:
6.    Age, date of birth:
7.    Dead body identified by:
8.    Name of the accompanying police personnel:
9.    Date and time of death:
10.   Date and hour of receipt of inquest papers and dead body:
11.   Date and hour of starting autopsy:
12.   Date and hour of concluding autopsy:
13.   Name of the experts conducting autopsy:
      a. …………….               c.…………….
      b. ……………..              d.………………
14.   Name of the Hospital:
      Relevant details (mention brief history of the case regarding
      circumstances of death and other sources of information):


      External Examination (general observation of the dead body):

                 (1) Height (2) Weight (3) Physique:



                                                                     217
           (4) Hairs       (5) Clothes and conditions:

     (6)   Special identifying features (Huliya):

     (7)   Post mortem changes present:

           (a)    Rigor mortis:

           (b)    Livor mortis:

           (c)    Algor mortis/cooling:

           (d)    Different signs of decomposition:

     (8)   Natural orifices:

           Eyes                  Mouth              Vagina/penis

           Nose                  Ears               Anus

           Urethra

     (9)   Injuries: Name, size, and site (Ante mortem/post
           mortem/old/fresh)



     INTERNAL EXAMINATION

Head and Neck:

     (1)   Scalp, skull:
     (2)   Brain and vessels:
     (3)   Orbital, nasal and aural cavities:
     (4)   Mouth, tongue:
     (5)   Neck (larynx, thyroid and other neck structure:
     (6)   Other relevant details

Chest (Thorax)

                                                                   218
(1)   Ribs and chest wall:
(2)   Diaphragm:
(3)   Oesophagus:
(4)   Trachea and bronchi:
(5)   Pleural activities:
(6)   Lungs:
(7)   Heart and pericardial sac (any content in pericardial sac,
      condition of three coronary arteries, valves and chambers
      and myocardium must be observed):

Abdomen

(1)   Peritoneal and pelvic cavity:
(2)   Stomach intestine:
(3)   Small intestine:
(4)   Large intestine:
(5)   Liver, gall bladder, pancreas:
(6)   Spleen:
(7)   Kidney, renal pelvis:
(8)   Genital organs:
(9)   Urinary bladder and urethra:

Spinal Column:

Specimen collected for analysis (mention preservative also):

Toxicology:

(1)   Stomach with contents:
(2)   Part of liver:
(3)   Kidney:


                                                               219
 (4)    Blood:
 (5)    Others, if any:

 Histopathology:

 Others (specify):

 Special Examination: (Procedures like neck dissection, pelvic
 dissection, flotation test of lungs etc. must be done in relevant
 cases and findings should be documented):

 Items handed over (when and who received?)

 (1)    Autopsy report:
 (2)    Viscera and other samples:
 (3)    Clothes and other articles:

 Opinion or conclusion

 1.     Opinion or cause of death:
        (Mention cause of death in Nepali language also)
 2.     Opinion on time since death:
 3.     Opinion on probable type of objects or weapon causing
        injuries:
 4.     Opinion on live birth or still birth:
 5.     Other opinion, if any:


        Signature of Medical Officer/Expert
1.                        2.                    3.

Signature:                Signature:            Signature:
Date:                     Date:                 Date:



                                                              220
             Name:                    Name:                   Name:
             Special qualification:   Special                 Special
             Training            and qualification:           qualification:
             experience:              Training          and Training           and
             NMC Reg. No.             experience:             experience:
                                      NMC Reg. No.            NMC Reg. No.


                     Seal of the Hospital:
                     Date:

Note bene:

     (1)      Post mortem shall be conducted by a forensic expert, to the
              extent possible, and by a trained doctor if such expert is not
              available.

     (2)      The report shall be prepared by the autopsy conducting expert
              or doctor himself or herself.

     (3)      The report shall be computer typed to the extent possible, if not
              so, be prepared in a legible manner. In addition, the original of
              the autopsy report shall be attached.

     (4)      If the specified space is not enough to contain the details,
              details shall also be set down in a separate sheet as well.




                                                                               221
                              Schedule-16

               (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 22)

                      Injury Examination Report

         (It is used in case of examination of detainee also)


1.   Case registration number:
2.   Name of the office referred for injury examination (with letter ref.
     No. and Date):
3.   Name, age, date of birth and sex of the injured person:
4.   Address:
5.   Name of the accompanying police personnel:
6.   Name of the Hospital/Health Center:
7.   Date, time and place of examination:
8.   Identification mark of the examinee:
9.   Consent for examination taken from:
     Injured person     Family member or others
10. Brief history about the incident (how and when the injuries were
     produced?)
11. Medical history of the examinee:
12. General physique and vitals:
     Height:                     Weight                  Pulse       B.P:
     Temperature            Respiratory Rate
     Degree of consciousness:
13. Injuries (name, size, site, color, surrounding area, signs of treatment,
     bleeding, marks, signs of healings, any imprints and content etc.):
         A. Type of injury:


                                                                        222
      a. Simple:
      b. Grievous:
      c. Severe:
      d. Other remarks:
B. Type of weapon/object used:
      a. Blunt force
      b. Sharp force
      c. Pointed objects
      d. Projectile
      e. Heat
      f. Chemical
      g. Others (specify)
C. Condition of the patient at the time of examination:
D. Severity (explain the severity in terms of existing condition
   and possible complication):
E. Investigation and reports (for example X-ray, USG, Blood,
   Urine etc.):
F. Treatment provided (briefly):
G. Referral (Where and Why?):
H. Follow up (if necessary):
I. Re-examination (whether case needs information about
   grade of disability:

Opinion: (Condition of examinee, severity of the injury, age of
the injury and possible causative objects should be considered
to frame opinion)

Name of the Examiner:


                                                            223
             Signature:

             Qualification: MC/NHPC

             Reg. No.:

             Office/Hospital/Health Center:

             Date:

             Seal of the Hospital/Health Center:



Note bene:

     (1)     Injury examination shall be conducted by a forensic expert, to
             the extent possible, and by a trained doctor if such expert is not
             available.

     (2)     The report shall be prepared by the injury examination
             conducting expert or doctor himself or herself.

     (3)     The report shall be computer typed to the extent possible, if not
             so, be prepared in a legible manner. In addition, the original of
             the autopsy report shall be attached.

     (4)     If the specified space is not enough to contain the details,
             details shall also be set down in a separate sheet as well.




                                                                           224
                                 Schdule-17
                (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 24)
                     Form of Identification of Person


         Deed of identification executed by the police office…….


I,………………….,             being    present     at     the     scene   of    crime
of………..committed by ……….., son of………………., a resident of Ward
No.…….., ………….Village Body/Municipality, ……….District………,
on……………..(date),          and    being     called    upon     by    the   police
office………….to identify the offender whom I saw while committing the
offence, have appeared in this court today. As I saw the following persons
and noticed their color and appearance at the time of the commission of that
incident, I hereby identify the said person as the same person/as not the same
person because I did not see him or her or his or her color and appearance is
different.


Name, surname and address of the identifying person:
Place of identification made:
Name, surname, address and designation of the identifying executing
authority:
Date of identification made:




                                                                            225
                                      Schedule-18
                    (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 25
                                     Police Diary


   1. Name of investigating authority:
   2. Date appointed for conducting investigation:
   3. Name of the case:
   4. Name of the plaintiff/defendant:
   5. Description related to investigation:
          (a) Time and date of receipt of information of the offence, and
               short description thereof:
          (b) Description of visits made by the investigating authority in the
               course of investigation:

Date   Place    Works          Exhibits,   If someone     Name, address    Signature   Remarks
                performed by   proof and   is arrested,   of the
                him or her     Evidence    description    person
                               received    thereof        inquired by
                                                          him or her and
                                                          matters stated
                                                          by such person
                                                          in relation to
                                                          the offence




                                                                                         226
                                                 Schedule-19
                       (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 31)
                                         Investigation Report


Case No:..........                               Date of filing:.........   Up to ..........


1.     Date and time of receipt of information or complaint of
       offence:.......................
2.     Name and designation of investigating authority ..........................
3.     Name and address of the informant..................................
4.     Short description of the first information report or notice
       ...............................
5.     Place, time and date where and when the offence was committed
       .......................................
6.     Time and date of the identification of the victim of the offence
       committed .................
7.     Place, time and date where and when the offender was arrested
       .............................................
8.     Name, surname, age and address (including street) of offender (if
       more than one offender, write the names of all offenders
       serially).......................
9.     Name, surname and address of the offender's father, mother………..
10.    Short description of the statement made by the accused before the
       competent authority..................................



                                                                                               227
11.   Place        where         goods          related   to   the   offence    were     found
      .....................................
12.   Name, surname, age and address of the victim of the offence
      ....................
13.   Clear description and sketch of the scene of crime...........................
14.   Instruments or arms used in the commission of the offence
      ........................
15.   Cause of incident and motive of the offender:...............
16.   Proposal opinion and punishment claimed by the investigation
      officer:.........................
17.   If compensation is caused to be recovered, description of who is
      entitled to recover how much compensation: .....................
18.   Names, surnames and addresses of witnesses who know about the
      offence; and short description of the deed made by them before the
      investigating authority :..........................
19.   Physical           proof         and       evidence      related   to    the     offence:
      :......................................
20.   If any other things are to be mentioned, description thereof:
21.   Serial description of the documents....................................




                                                                                           228
                                                     Schedule-20
                               (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 32)
                                          Form of Charge Sheet
                                                                            To be filled in by the court:
                                                                            Registration No:
                                                                             Registration date:
                                                  A Charge Sheet
   filed under Section 20 of Chapter-3 of the National Criminal Procedure
                                                 (Code) Act, 2017
                                             in ....................... court
                                              No.... of the year......
Government of Nepal, on the report of......................                              Plaintiff
                                                         Versus
(1)         .............................................................                Defendant
(2)         ............................................................
(3)         .............................................................
                                                                  Case:
Description of the case:
      (1)
      (2)
      (3)
Charge against the accused:
Details of legal provision related to the charge:
Sentence to be awarded to the accused:
Where the accused has confessed the offence, description thereof and
proposed reduction in punishment for such confession:
Proof, evidence:

                                                                                                            229
Proof, evidence and thing related to the offence:
Witness:
Eye-witness:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
If compensation is caused to be provided to the person who has sustained
injury from the offence, the claim for compensation:


Exhibits or other goods or things connected with the offence and can be
admissible in evidence:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Documents presented:
(1)
(2)
(3)
It is humbly prayed that the court institute proceedings based on this charge
sheet.


Seal of office:
Government attorney's:
Signature:
Name:
Designation:

                                                                           230
Office:
Date:


Note bene:
(1)     While framing a charge sheet, it should be so framed that the matters
        required to be set down pursuant to Section 32 of Chapter-3 of this
        Act are also set down.
(2)     The names, surnames, addresses of all offenders should be mentioned
        in the versus column in serial order.
(3)     The available proof, evidence and document should be set down
        serially in the above form.




                                                                         231
                                           Schedule-21
                      (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 53)
                                      Form of Complaint

                                                                 To be filled in by the court:
                                                                 Registration No.:
                                                                 Registration Date:


                                           A Complaint
      filed in ................under Section........of Chapter.........of the National
                          Criminal Procedure (Code) Act, 2017


                     Criminal case-file number ........of the year.....
......................,aged..............,a resident of.........................Complainant
                                                   Versus
......................,aged..............,a resident of..........................Offender
                                          Case: .............
The description of the offence committed by the said offender is as follows.
I humbly pray that the proceedings of case be instituted against him or her.
1.      Description of the offence:..........................
2.      Charge made against the offender................
3.      Related law:...........
4.      Sentence to be imposed on the offender: ..............
5.      Injury caused from the offence and amount recoverable from the
        offender:
6.      Where the accused has confessed the offence, description thereof and
        proposed remission of punishment for such confession:


                                                                                              232
7.      Other necessary matters:
Evidence
Witness:
1.
2.
          (Full name, age and address of the witness)
Documents:
1.
2.
Exhibits:
1.
2.                                                    Complainant:
                                        .....aged....., son/daughter/wife of.......,
                                               a resident of.........born in..........
Date:




                                                                                  233
                                      Schedule-22
                    (Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 57)
       Notice for appearance in pursuance of the warrant for arrest


Notice issued by.....................court

Whereas, on the report/information of ......................, a charge sheet has been
filed in the case of............. (state the offence) in which the Government of
Nepal is plaintiff and you/you et al................are defendant;
Now, therefore, the warrant for arrest issued against you is herewith
forwarded. You are hereby required to appear in person in pursuance of this
warrant for arrest.
Seal of court                                            Concerned authority's:
                                                         Signature:




                                                                                 234
                                  Schedule-23
                 (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 58)
     Form of warrant for arrest to be issued by the court against the
                                    offender
                           .
      Notice issued by ……………                    court


Whereas, on the report or information of ......................, a charge sheet has
been filed in the case of.............     (state the offence) in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff and you/you et al................are defendant;
Now, therefore, the warrant for arrest is issued to you. You are hereby
informed to appear in pursuance of this warrant for arrest.
Seal of court                                           Concerned authority's:
                                                        Signature:




                                                                               235
                                    Schedule-24
                 (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 58)
   Form of warrant for arrest to be issued by the court in the name of
                          witness and other person

A warrant for arrest issued by.............court in the name of the accused
                          ......................
                                      (Name of the officer or office)


Whereas, the proceedings of the case have been instituted in this court,
against……………….. (name and address of the person to be arrested), on
the charge of…………….(offence), you are hereby directed to arrest the
said person and produce him or her before this court within seven days,
excluding the time required for journey. In the event of the failure to
produce the said person within the said period, you are required to serve this
warrant for arrest and the notice sent along with it on the eighth day and give
information thereof to this court, and to keep on searching the person to be
arrested, arrest him or her wherever found and produce him or her before
this court.
The concerned authority's signature:
Date:
Seal of the court:




                                                                              236
                                   Schedule-25
                   (Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 58)
                 35-day warrant for arrest issued by the court

Whereas, in the case of...............(state the offence) in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff on the information report of ...................... and you/you
et al................are defendant, a warrant for arrest has been issued for
arresting you but you have not been arrested;
Now, therefore, this 35-day warrant for arrest has also been posted. If you
voluntarily appear or are arrested and produced before this court within
thirty-five days excluding the time required for journey, you shall be heard
and tried in accordance with law. If you remain absconding thereby expiring
the time-limit, the case shall be tried in accordance with law; and you shall
not be entitled to make a complaint subsequently.
Date:
Seal of court:                                          Concerned authority's:
                                                        Signature:




                                                                                 237
                                           Schedule-26
                         (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 59)
                   Form of summons issued in the name of accused


A summons issued by............in the name of................a resident of............

Whereas, a charge sheet has been filed in this court against you on the
charge          of.........(offence)      and       the      matter        shall    be   heard
on................day.................date..............month...............year;
No, therefore, you are hereby required to appear in this court. If you fail to
appear on that day, a warrant shall be issued to arrest you, and action shall
be instituted in accordance with the law. The complaint against you is
attached herewith.
                                                              Concerned authority's:
                                                                                    Signature:
(Copies of documents attached)
1............................
2. ...........................
3. ...........................
4. ...........................
                                                   (Seal of the court)
Date: .............




                                                                                           238
                                        Schedule-27
                         (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 59)
            Form of summons to be issued in individual criminal case


A summons issued by............in the name of................a resident of............

Whereas, a complaint has been filed in this court against you on the charge
of.........(offence);
Now, therefore, this summons is hereby issued to you. You are hereby
required to appear in this court within thirty days after the issuance of this
summons. You are hereby informed that if you fail to appear within the said
period, action shall be instituted in accordance with the law.
                                                      Concerned authority's:
                                                                            Signature:


(Copies of documents attached)
1............................
2. ...........................
3. ...........................
4. ...........................
                                              (Seal of the court)
Date: .............




                                                                                         239
                                       Schedule-28
                                (Relating to Section 60)
                 Form of summons issued in the name of witness


A summons issued by............in the name of................a resident of............

Whereas, it is required to examine you on the matter of the case of............in
which ..................is plaintiff and ..............is defendant;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear in this court at.......o'clock
in the morning on the------day of the month of..........the year........ If you fail
to appear, the matter shall be dealt with in accordance with law.
                                                          Concerned authority's:
                                                                            Signature:


(Seal of the court)
Date: ............




                                                                                         240
                                 Schedule-29
                 (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 74)
       Form of deed to be executed by person furnishing bail/bond



Whereas, in the case of…………(of the year……) in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff on the report of..............and …………(defendant), a
bail/bond of…………… has been demanded by the order of the
………..court dated…………;
Now, therefore, I have made this petition for permission to furnish a
bail/bond of …………….rupees in cash or of the following property. I shall
appear at all times as and when the court so specifies, and if I fail to do so, I
hereby agree to the forfeiture of the bail/bond to the extent the sum of
money payable by me.
   Name, surname and address of the person furnishing bail/bond:
      Name, surname and address of father and grand-father:
      Description of the property:………




                                                                             241
                                 Schedule-30
                 (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 74)
     Form of deed to be executed by person furnishing property as
                                  guarantee



Whereas, in the case of…………(of the year……) in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff on the report of..............and …………(defendant), a
guarantee of…………… has been demanded by the order of the
………..court dated…………;
Now, therefore, I have made this petition for permission to furnish a
guarantee of …………….rupees in cash or of the following property. I shall
appear at all times as and when the court so specifies, and if I fail to do so, I
hereby agree to the forfeiture of the guarantee to the extent the sum of
money payable by me or the sentence imposed on me.


Name, surname and address of the person furnishing guarantee:
Name, surname and address of father and grand-father:
Description of the property:………




                                                                             242
                                 Schedule-31
                 (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 73)
Form of deed to be executed if other person than the accused/defendant
                            furnishes guarantee

Whereas, in the case of…………(of the year……) in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff on the report of..............and …………(defendant), a
guarantee of…………… has been demanded from him/her, by the order of
the ………..court dated…………, and I…………………..being agreed to
furnish a sum of…………rupees in cash or the following property as the
guarantee in his or her favor;
Now, therefore, I hereby appear to furnish the guarantee. I hereby covenant
that I shall cause him or her (the accused/defendant) to appear at the time
appointed by the court; and in the case of my default, I hereby agree to the
recovery of the sentence imposable on, or any amount payable by, him or
her from the said guarantee or any other property.


Name, surname and address of the guarantor/surety:
Name, surname and address of father and grand-father:
Description of the property:………

Signature:
Date:




                                                                        243
                                    Schedule-32
                             (Relating to Section 80)
                          Form of Warrant for Detention


Mr/Ms..................
Address............

Whereas, it is required to try the case by holding you in police custody in the
course of the offence of …………….., in which the Government of Nepal is
plaintiff on report of.............., and you, et.al, are defendant;
Now, therefore, this warrant for detention is hereby issued for holding you in
police custody with effect from this date.


                                                     The concerned authority:
                                                             Signature:
                                                             Name:
                                                             Designation:
                                                             Office:
                                                             Date:




                                                                                244
                                 Schedule-33
                  (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 82)
               Form of Book of Appointed Date for Appearance


Book of appointed date for appearance maintained by the ..............
Year........


Month,    SN      Case Name of the       Name of the Purpose for         Remarks
date, day              complainant,      accused or  which date for
                       appellant or      respondent appearance is
                       applicant                     appointed




                                                     Signature:




                                                                          245
                                 Schedule-34
                  (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 82)
      Form of Acknowledgment of Appointed Date for Appearance


Book of appointed date for appearance maintained by the ..............
Year........

      Plaintiff                                                    Defendant


      Case:
      Date:


Whereas, the case will be enlisted in the cause list for final hearing/
…………..proceeding will be conducted on……..(date);
Now, therefore, I hereby sign binding myself to appear in this court/office
at………hours, on the……..day of the month of …….of the year 20…….


Plaintiff…..                                         Defendant….




                                                                          246
                                             Schedule-35
                       (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 83)
          Form of Memorandum of Appointed Date for Appearance

Memorandum of appointed date for appearance issued by...............in
the name of................
Case......................year....................No.................

                                    Versus..................
Whereas, the date of ........has been appointed as the date for appearance for
the purpose of ................;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear at........o'clock on the said
day.
                                    Signature of the employee appointing the due date.


Whereas, the date of ........has been appointed as the date for appearance for
the purpose of ................;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear at........o'clock on the said
day.
                          Signature of the employee appointing date for appearance.




                                                                                  247
                                      Schedule-36

                   (Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 89)

                            Form of Power of Attorney



I have appointed Mr./Ms. .......................as my attorney to carry out the act
of.....................on my behalf, in the case of.......... with................ He or she
does not suffer any disqualification for being an attorney.

Date:

Thumb impressions                                                           Signature:

Right          Left                                          ...........(Full name)

                                                             ...........(Full address)

                                                             ………(Citizenship No.)



I hereby consent to act as an attorney of Mr./Ms. ..............., a resident
of..............., as mentioned above. I shall perform the said act with honesty. I
do not suffer any disqualification for being an attorney.

Date:

Thumb impressions                                                           Signature:

Right          Left                                          ...........(Full name)

                                                             ...........(Full address)

                                                              ………(Citizenship No.)




                                                                                         248
It is true and correct that this power of attorney has been drawn up and
signed in our presence.

Witnesses:

   (1)      Writer witness, age of ......years, a resident of..................

               Thumb impressions:                                           Signature:

               Right           Left

   (2)         Writer witness, age of ......years, a resident of..................

               Thumb impressions
         Signature:

               Right           Left




                                                                                     249
                                     Schedule-37

                  (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 106)

                      Form of oath to be taken by witness



I............hereby take an oath in the name of the God/ swear with truth and
honesty that in the case of...............versus............, I shall give true statement
of whatever I have seen, known and heard; that I shall not conceal or lie any
matter; and that I shall give true answers to all questions asked by the court
and by or on behalf of the parties to the case, to the extent of whatever I
have seen, known and heard.



Signature of oath taking person:

Signature of oath administering person:




                                                                                     250
                                         Schedule-38

                       (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 106)

                          Form of taking deposition of witness

Case................

Number............of the year.........

                                    Versus..........
Deposition of witness...................
Questions and answers of the questions
Question: What is your and your father's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:


Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the person/judge taking deposition:

Note: The questions and answers thereof shall be recorded on the same order
as examined, cross-examined or re-examined by the parties to the case; and
if the court has asked the witness any question at the beginning, in the
meanwhile or at the end, that question and the answer thereof shall also be
set down according to the serial order.




                                                                       251
                                  Schedule-39
                (Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 107)
                             Form of Commission


                        A commission sent by...............

                                  Case.............

                                  of the year.....

                               Date......................

                            Complainant..................

                                         Vs.

                            Accused.......................

                        Deposition of witness...............

Question: What is your and your father's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Signature of parties:
Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the person/judge taking deposition:

Note: The questions and answers thereof shall be recorded on the same order
as examined, cross-examined or re-examined by the parties to the case; and
if the court has asked the witness any question at the beginning, in the
meanwhile or at the end, that question and the answer thereof shall also be
set down according to the serial order.

                                                                       252
                                 Schedule-40

                  (Relating to sub-section (6) of Section 109)

    Form of deed of record of examination of witness through video
                                  conference


We, the undersigned, hereby covenant that it is true and correct that, in the
case of………….in which …………….is plaintiff and ……….is defendant,
being …………, the witness of the plaintiff/defendant, unable to appear in
the court, the said witness was examined in our presence through video
conference by the order of the …….court dated………
In presence of:
Name, surname and signature of the Local Level member or representative:
Name, surname and signature of the local person:
Name, surname and signature of the witness:
Name, surname and signature of the employee deputed by the court:
Name, surname and signature of the technical employee:
Name, surname and signature of the plaintiff, defendant or his or her
attorney:
Name, surname and          signature of the legal       practitioner of the
plaintiff/defendant, if any:
Place:
Date:




                                                                         253
                                 Schedule-41
                (Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 115)
   Form of commission to be used for examination of witness abroad

                       A commission sent by...............
            In the case............. (plaintiff) and …….(defendant)
       In the name of the witness……….., residing in ……..(country)
                                 of the year.....
                              Date......................
                           Complainant..................
                                        Vs.
                           Accused.......................
                       Deposition of witness...............
Question: What is your and your father's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Name of the country where commission was executed:
Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the authority taking deposition:

Note: The questions and answers thereof shall be recorded on the same order
as examined, cross-examined or re-examined by the parties to the case; and
if the court has asked the witness any question at the beginning, in the
meanwhile or at the end, that question and the answer thereof shall also be
set down according to the serial order.



                                                                       254
                                       Schedule-42
                   (Relating to sub-section (8) of Section 122)
                            Form of statement of defense
                                                                To be filled by the court
                                                                         Registration No.:
                                                                       Registration Date.:
Submitted to:
                            Form of statement of defense
Criminal case file number...........of the year......
Accused................, age of ......years, a resident of .........
                                           Versus
Complainant, .................., age of ......years, a resident of .........

                                      Case:...............

In connection with the charge made against me by the said complainant, my
statements or pleas are as follows:
1...................................
2...................................
3..................................
                                         Evidence
1...................................
2...................................
3..................................
                                        Documents
1...................................
2...................................
Mr./Ms. .............. age of ......years, son/daughter/wife of Mr./Ms............

Date:
                                       Signature/thumb impressions of the accused:



                                                                                      255
                                                   Schedule-43
                         (Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 131)
                                             Form of Judgment
                                                   ...........Court
                                                Branch of...........
                                               Judgment
Case..............Number...............of the year....................
                                         ..........................................
                                                         Versus
                                           ......................................
1.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
                                     (Main points of the complaint)
2.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
      (Main points of the deposition of the accused or statement of defense)
3.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
                              (The matters to be decided by the court)
4.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
               (Decision of the court along with the reasons for the same)
5.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
                        (Punishment sentenced to the party or witness)
6.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
                                         (Other necessary matters)

Date:                                         Signature of the judge:




                                                                                                                      256
                                          Schedule-44
                    (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 132)
                              Form of notice of judgment


                                             By...........
                                     Notice of judgment
Notice of judgment given to ...............(full name and address of the party)
Case..............Number...............of the year....................
                                ..........................................
                                               Versus
                                  ......................................
Whereas, judgment (main contents of the decision) has been passed by this
court in the aforesaid case...............on (date);
Now, therefore, a notice of the judgment is hereby given to you.
(Seal of the court)


Signature of authority sending the notice:
Date:




                                                                                  257
                                          Schedule-45

                     (Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 136)

                           Form of memorandum of appeal



                                                                  To be filled by the court

                                                                         Registration No.:

                                                                       Registration Date.:

Submitted to:

                                 Memorandum of appeal

First/second appeal number...........of the year......

................, age of ......years, a resident of ........
                                      Appellant/complainant/accused

                                             Versus

.................., age of ......years, a resident of .........
                                      Respondent/complainant/accused

                                        Case:...............



        Whereas, the..........................has passed judgment in the aforesaid
case..............awarding punishment of.......... to me/us and ordering the
recovery of the claimed amount or compensation from me/us;

        Now, therefore, I/we have made this appeal on the matters with which
I/we am/are not satisfied, by serving the sentence awarded by the judgment/



                                                                                       258
furnishing a bail/bond/guarantee for the same. My/our statements are as
follows:

1................

2................

3................

4................

                            The appellant's:

                           Signature or thumb impression:

Date:                      Name:

                           Date:




                                                                    259
                                          Schedule-46
                     (Relating to sub-section (6) of Section 140)
                                   Form of Counterclaim
                                                                       To be filled by the court
                                                                              Registration No.:
                                                                             Registration Date:
Submitted to:
                                         Counterclaim
First/second appeal number...........of the year......
         ................, age of ......years, a resident of .......
         Respondent/complainant/accused
                                             Versus
.................., age of ......years, a resident of .........
                                      Appellant/complainant/accused
                                        Case:...............


Whereas, I/we have got a notice from the ………court in the said case to
submit a counterclaim;
Now, therefore, I/we have submitted this counterclaim. My/our statements
are as follows:
1................
2................
3................
4................
                                      Respondent's:
Date:                                 Name:
                                      Address:
                                      Signature or thumb impression:


                                                                                            260
                                                   Schedule-47
                                        (Relating to Section 150)
                                     Form of Appellate Judgment
                                                   ...........Court
                                                Branch of...........
                                               Appellate Judgment
Case..............Number...............of the year....................
        ..........................(full name, surname and address of the appellant)
                                                       Versus
       ..........................(full name, surname and address of the respondent)
1.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the appellant)
2.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the respondent)
3.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the judgment from which appeal has been made)
4.........................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................
(The matters to be decided by the court)
5.........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................
(Decision of the court along with the reasons for the same)
                    Date:                                    Signature of the judge:




                                                                                                                      261
                                                   Schedule-48
                                        (Relating to Section 150)
                                    Form of Reference Judgment
                                                   ...........Court
                                                Branch of...........
                                               Reference Judgment
Case..............Number...............of the year....................
                                        ..........................................
                                                        Versus
                                          ......................................
1.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the complaint)
2.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the deposition of the accused/statement of defense)
3.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(The matters to be decided by the court)
4.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Judgment of the court making the reference for sanction)
5.........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................
(Decision of the court along with the reasons for the same)
Date:                                          Signature of the judge:




                                                                                                                      262
                                         Schedule-49
                     (Related to sub-section (4) of Section 151)
              Form of order for arrest in pursuance of judgment


                                              Order
                                        issued by.........
Directed to the police office..........


Whereas, the punishment of .............has been sentenced by the judgment of
this court dated...............to Mr./Ms......................, a resident of .................;
and the said person has absconded;
Now, therefore, it is hereby ordered that the said person be arrested as soon
as possible and handed over to the prison office................
Date.....
Signature of the judge:
Seal of the court:




                                                                                               263
                                             Schedule-50
                                   (Relating to Section 171)
                                Form of index of documents


          .............................................versus.......................................
Case:
Case-file number.........of year........
Serial              Short          Name of                          Date of       Signature of
number of           description of parties                          submission of employee
documents           documents      submitting                       documents
                                   documents




Signature of preparer:

Signature of certifier:




                                                                                                       264
