      The Criminal Offences (Sentencing and
           Execution) Act, 2017 (2074)

                                                 Date of Authentication:

                                             16 October 2017 (2074.6.30)


                  Act Number 38 of the year 2017 (2074)

     An Act Made to Provide for Determination and Execution of
                     Sentences for Criminal Offences



Preamble: Whereas it is expedient to make legal provisions for the
determination of appropriate sentences for offenders who commit
criminal offences and the execution of such sentences, in order to
maintain the interest and decency of the general public by creating a just,
peaceful and safe society;

      Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament under clause (1) of
Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has made this Act.

                               Chapter – 1

                              Preliminary

1.    Short title and commencement: (1) This Act is cited as the
      "Criminal Offenses (Sentencing and Execution) Act, 2017
      (2074)".

            (2)     Clauses (d), (e), (f) and (g) of Section 17, Sections
      22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 and 49 of this Act shall come into
      force on a date appointed by the Government of Nepal by a



                                                                         1
     notification in the Nepal Gazette, and the other Sections shall
     come into force on the first date of the month of Bhadra 2075
     (……….).



2.   Definitions: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in
     this Act,-

           (a)    "Penal Code" means the National Penal (Code) Act,
                  2017;

           (b)    "offender" means a person who is convicted by a
                  court of any offense;

           (c)    "law" means a law in force for the time being;

           (d)    "prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as
                  prescribed in the rules framed under this Act;

           (e)    "probation officer" means a probation officer
                  appointed or designated pursuant to Section 49;

           (f)    "Probation and Parole Board" means the probation
                  and parole board under Section 38;

           (g)    "Criminal Procedure Code" means the National
                  Criminal Procedure (Code) Act, 2017;

           (h)    "Committee" means the sentence recommendation
                  committee under Section 46.



3.   Application of the Act: (1) This Act shall apply to the
     determination by a court of a sentence for any offence and
     execution thereof.


                                                                      2
(2)   This Act shall not apply to the following:

      (a)   imposing a sentence for an offence relating to
            the contempt of court,

      (b)   imposing a sentence for a breach of the
            privilege, proceeding of which has been
            instituted by the Legislature-Parliament,

      (c)   in cases where any law provides for the non-
            applicability of this Act.




                                                        3
                                Chapter – 2

                    General Principles of Sentencing

4.   Application of provisions of the Penal Code and Criminal
     Procedure Code: (1) This Act shall be implemented subject to the
     Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code.

           (2)    Wherever used in this Act, the several terms defined
     in the Penal Code and Criminal Procedure Code shall have the
     respective meanings therein set forth.

           (3)    The principles set forth in the Penal Code shall also
     be applicable to the implementation of this Act.



5.   Lesser sentence to be imposed: If any offence is punishable by
     law with a sentence that is lesser at the time of sentencing than the
     sentence at the time of commission of the offence, sentence shall
     be so determined that it is the lesser.



6.   Sentence under other law to be determined: If any law provides
     for a sentence of imprisonment for a fixed term or a sentence of a
     fine or penalty of fixed amount for any offence, the offender of
     such offence shall be subjected to such imprisonment, fine or
     penalty accordingly.



7.   Sentence to be imposed under this Act: Except for the cases set
     forth in Section 6, sentence for any offence shall be determined
     pursuant to this Act.



                                                                        4
8.    Sentence to be determined after conviction: (1) A court shall
      determine a sentence to any person for any offense only after such
      person is convicted of such offence by the court in accordance
      with law.

            (2)     Sentence shall be determined pursuant to sub-section
      (1) not later than thirty days of the conviction.



9.    Separate hearing to be conducted:          (1) A sentence shall be
      determined for an offender pursuant to Section 8 by conducting a
      separate hearing.

             Provided that no separate hearing shall be required for
      determining sentence for an offender of an offense punishable by
      sentence of imprisonment for up to three years or fine of up to
      thirty thousand rupees.

            (2)    Except in cases where a judge who declared
      conviction has died, retired or become unable to discharge duties
      because of a severe disease, the same judge himself or herself
      shall, in any other circumstance whatsoever, determine the
      sentence by conducting a hearing under sub-section (1).



10.   Sentence to be determined by conducting hearing in open
      bench: (1) Sentence shall be determined in open bench for an
      offender of a case other than a case that is required by law to be
      heard in camera.

             (2)    Sentence shall be determined under sub-section (1)
      in presence of the offender or his or her legal practitioner as well.


                                                                              5
             (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
      (2), nothing shall bar the determination of a sentence under this
      Act even if the offender cannot be produced before the court for
      reason of security or public interest or the offender refuses to
      appear before the court or the offender is absconding or legal
      practitioner of the offender is not present.

            (4)    An offender who cannot be produced before the court
      under sub-section (3) may be produced through video-
      conferencing; and where an offender is so produced, the offender
      shall be deemed to have appeared before the court for the purpose
      of this Section.



11.   More than one sentence not to be executed: (1) In determining a
      sentence for an offender who has committed more than one
      offense in a single incident, each offence shall be deemed to have
      been committed separately and separate sentence shall be
      determined for the same.

            Provided that where sentence for more than one offence
      committed at the same time is to be executed, the sentence for
      the offense carrying the maximum sentence shall be executed.

            (2)    If two or more acts constitute an offence and any one
      of such acts is itself a separate offense, only the sentence for the
      offence carrying the maximum punishment shall be imposed.

            (3)    If an act constitutes separate offenses under the
      different Acts, the sentence provided by the Act which is the
      highest of the sentences under such Acts shall be executed.



                                                                        6
              Provided that in determining the sentence, separate sentence
     shall be determined for each offense.

              Explanation:      For     the   purposes   of   this     Section,
        imprisonment and fine shall be considered separate sentences and
        executed separately.



9.      Order to be given to prepare pre-sentence report: (1) If, prior
        to determining the sentence for an offense punishable by
        imprisonment for more than three years or fine of more than thirty
        thousand rupees, the court thinks so necessary, it may order a
        probation officer or parole officer to prepare a pre-sentence report
        in respect of the offender.

              (2) Upon receipt of the order pursuant to sub-section (1), the
        probation officer or parole officer shall prepare a report in respect
        of the offender, setting out the following matters:

                     (a)    personal, social and cultural background of the
                            offender,

                     (b)    circumstances surrounding the commission of
                            the offence,

                     (c)    the offender's conduct before the commission
                            of the offence,

                     (d)    the offender's age,

                     (e)    such other matters as considered necessary by
                            the probation officer or parole officer.




                                                                             7
               (3) After the preparation of the report under sub-section (2),
      the probation officer or parole officer shall submit such report to
      the court.

               (4)   Upon receipt of the report under sub-section (3), the
      court shall provide the report to the concerned government
      attorney, offender and his or her legal practitioner and, if the
      offender is a child, to his or her guardian.

               (5)   Upon receipt of the report under sub-section (4), such
      government attorney, offender, guardian or legal practitioner may
      submit his or her opinion on that report to the Court.

               (6)   Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, in cases where the probation officer or parole officer is
      not designated or appointed, the court shall order the legal
      practitioners of the plaintiff and the defendant to prepare the report
      under sub-section (1).

               (7)   Upon receipt of the order under sub-section (6), such
      legal practitioner shall prepare and submit such report to the
      Court.



13.   Purposes of sentencing to be taken into account: The court shall
      determine the sentence by taking into account all or any of the
      following purposes:

               (a)   to deter the offender or other persons from
                     committing the offence,

               (b)   to protect the society or community,




                                                                           8
            (c)   to deliver justice, along with compensation, to the
                  victim,

            (d)   to assist in the offender's rehabilitation in the society,
                  or to reform the offender,

            (e)   to isolate the offender from the society,

            (f)   to make the offender regret his or her offending and
                  promote     in   the    offender    of    a   sense    of
                  acknowledgement that harm has been done to the
                  victim or the community,

            (g)   to denounce the conduct prohibited by law.



14.   Matters to be taken into account in determining sentence: The
      court shall determine a sentence by taking into account the
      following matters:

            (a)   sentence should not be disproportionate to the gravity
                  of the offence and the degree of culpability of the
                  offender,

            (b)   sentence should not be more severe than is necessary
                  to achieve the purposes of sentencing,

            (c)   sentence should not be incompatible with or unequal
                  to the sentence previously imposed on another
                  offender of the offence committed in similar
                  circumstances,

            (d)   in determining a sentence for two offences or
                  imposing a sentence for another offence on an



                                                                          9
                   offender who is serving a sentence for one offence,
                   the overall sentence should not be unjust and
                   disproportionate,

            (e)    sentence of imprisonment should not be imposed
                   where other sentence seems to be adequate in
                   proportion to the offense.



15.   Grounds for determining sentence: (1) A sentence shall be
      determined pursuant to this Act on the following grounds:

                  (a)    the gravity of the offence and the degree of
                         culpability of the offender,

                  (b)    the circumstances surrounding the commission
                         of offense,

                  (c)    the gravity of the offence aggravating or
                         mitigating factors,

                  (d)    the offender's conduct and previous activities,

                  (e)    purposes of the sentencing set forth in Section
                         13.

            (2)    In determining a sentence pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the sentence shall be determined as follows:

                   (a)    the sentence of imprisonment for an offender
                          who commits a heinous or grave offence,

                   (b)    in sentencing a child, his or her reform and
                          rehabilitation,




                                                                           10
                  (c)    for a recidivist, a sentence that is double the
                         sentence imposable for the last offense
                         committed,

                  (d)    the sentence of imprisonment for an offender
                         who is dangerous to the society or the
                         community,

                  (e)    for an offender who, being a holder of a
                         position or authority in any government office
                         or public or body corporate, commits an
                         offence by abusing such position or authority,
                         the sentence that is one and half of the sentence
                         imposable on such offence.



16.   Matters to be taken into account in sentencing a child: (1) In
      imposing a sentence on a child, the following matters shall also be
      taken into account:

                 (a)    his or her best interests,

                 (b)    the gravity of the offence and the degree of
                        culpability,

                 (c)    his or her personal circumstances,

                        Explanation: For the purposes of this clause,
                        "personal circumstances" includes the age,
                        education, family and social condition of the
                        child, type of the offense, harm caused by the
                        offense and the objective of the commission of
                        the offence.


                                                                       11
                 (d)   compensation offered to the victim,

                 (e)   remorse shown for the offence,

                 (f)   desire for living a good and useful life.

           (2)    In imposing a sentence on a child below sixteen years
     of age, the sentence of imprisonment shall not be imposed except
     in cases where the child has committed a heinous or grave
     offence or is a recidivist.



17. Matters to be set out in determining sentence: (1) In
    determining a sentence pursuant to this Act, the following matters
    shall be set out in the decision or order:

           (a)    the reason for awarding the sentence,

           (b)    in the case of determination of the sentence of fine,
                  the amount of fine to be paid by the offender, the date
                  for payment of the fine, whether the fine is payable
                  by installments, the sentence of imprisonment
                  imposable for failure to pay the fine,

           (c)    in the case of determination of the sentence of
                  imprisonment, the term of imprisonment, the date of
                  being held in custody, the date of completion of the
                  service of imprisonment,

           (d)    in the case of a community service order, the type,
                  period and time of the service, and sentence
                  imposable for failure to do the service,




                                                                      12
(e)   in the case of determination of the sentence of
      imprisonment in a reform home or rehabilitation
      center, the period of stay in such home or center, the
      terms and conditions to be complied with and
      sentence imposable for failure to comply with such
      terms and conditions,

(f)   whether the offender can be released on parole or not,

(g)   if imprisonment is capable of suspension, the period
      of such suspension,

(h)   if compensation is to be made, the amount of
      compensation, period and procedure for making
      compensation, and sentence imposable for failure to
      make compensation,

(i)   in the case of conditional suspension of sentence for a
      child under sub-section (5) of Section 24, sentence
      imposable for violation of such condition,

(j)   such other necessary matters as the court thinks
      appropriate.




                                                          13
                                   Chapter-3

                       Provisions Relating to Fine

18.   Grounds for determination of sentence of fine: (1) The sentence
      of fine for an offence shall be determined, taking into account
      such offence and the maximum and minimum amount of fine, in
      addition to the other matters set forth in this Act.

            (2)      In determining the fine pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the following matters shall also be taken into account:

               (a)     the offender's financial status and source of
                       income,

               (b)     financial harm caused to other person from the
                       offence committed by the offender,

               (c)     benefit received by the offender or his or her family
                       from the commission of the offence by the
                       offender,

               (d)     implications of the fine to the family required to be
                       maintained by the offender,

               (e)     the amount of compensation required to be paid to
                       the victim,

               (f)     liability likely to be borne by the government due
                       to non-payment of the fine,

               (g)     if the offender is a body corporate, the financial
                       status and transactions of such body,

               (h)     if an amount is required to be deposited into the
                       victim relief fund, such amount.



                                                                         14
                   Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "victim
            relief fund" means the victim relief fund under Section 48.

            (3)    In determining a fine pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      fine shall be determined on the basis of the amount in controversy
      if such amount is set.



19.   Fine to be so determined as not to be prejudicial to
      compensation: If, in imposing a fine pursuant to Section 18, the
      fine is to be so imposed that the offender must also pay
      compensation to the victim of the offence, the fine shall not be so
      imposed that the offender is unable to pay such compensation.



20.   Fine to be paid immediately: (1) The offender must pay
      immediately the fine imposed pursuant to this Chapter.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
      (1), if such offender, being unable to pay such fine immediately,
      furnishes any property as the security for such fine, the court may
      order the offender to so pay the fine in a maximum of three
      installments that such amount is paid up within one year.



21.   Fine to be so determined as to be payable by each offender: In
      determining a fine for more than one offender in relation to any
      offence, the fine shall be so determined that each offender has to
      pay the fine according to the degree of the offending.




                                                                      15
                                   Chapter – 4

             Provisions Relating to Community Service

22.   Power to order for community service: (1) If, in relation of an
      offender who is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not
      exceeding six months, having regard also to the offence
      committed by the offender, the age, conduct of the offender, the
      circumstances and the manner of the commission of the offence, it
      appears to the court that it is not appropriate to imprison the
      offender, the court may order the offender to do the community
      service or to do the community service for the remaining period
      after the offender has served the sentence of imprisonment for
      such period as the court deems appropriate in relation to such
      offence.

            (2)         The court shall make an order of community service
      only if the offender agrees to do the community service.

            (3)         For the purpose of this Section, the following work
      shall be considered as a community service:

                  (a)      doing a public work for free,

                  (b)      serving at a hospital, elderly home, orphanage for
                           free,

                  (c)      doing environment protection related work for
                           free,

                  (d)      teaching or serving at a public or community
                           school for free,




                                                                          16
        (e)      providing or causing to be provided sports
                training for free,

        (f)     doing work at a benevolent organization for free,

        (g)     appearing before such rehabilitation or reform
                organization as designated by the court and doing
                such work as specified by such organization.

      (4) In making the community service order pursuant to
sub-section (1), the order shall be so made that the offender is
required to do any work under sub-section (3) for a period that is
equal to that of imprisonment imposed on the offender or to that
of imprisonment which remains to be served by the offender.

      (5)     In determining the period under sub-section (4), the
court shall also specify the hours of work a day to be done by
the offender.

      (6)     In making an order of community service to be done
by the offender pursuant to sub-section (1), the terms and
conditions to be compiled with by him or her shall also be
specified.

      (7) If the offender does the community service under
sub-section (3) in compliance with the terms and conditions
under sub-section (6), the sentence of imprisonment imposed on
him or her shall be deemed to have been served.

      (8)     The offender shall do the community service under
the supervision of a probation officer or parole officer as
designated by the Probation and Parole Board.




                                                                17
       (9)   The court shall revoke the order under sub-section
 (1) if any offender fails to do the community service set forth in
 the order issued pursuant to this Section or does not comply with
 the terms and conditions under sub-section (6) or it is known
 after the issuance of the order of community service that the
 offender had committed any offence previously or the offender
 commits any other offence during that period.

      (10)   After the revocation of the order pursuant to sub-
section (9), such offender must serve the sentence of
imprisonment imposed on him or her or the remaining period of
imprisonment to be served by him or her in prison.




                                                                18
                                Chapter – 5

                  Provisions Relating to Imprisonment



23. Sentence of imprisonment to be imposed if other sentence is not
    adequate: Except as otherwise provided in this Act, any offender
    shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the event of the sentence of
    fine and community service being not adequate.



24. Sentence of imprisonment may be suspended: (1) In cases where
    an offender on whom a sentence of imprisonment for less than one
    year has been imposed has committed the offence for the first time
    and, having regard to the offence committed by the offender, the
    age, conduct of the offender, the circumstances and the manner of
    the commission of the offence, it appears to the court that it is not
    appropriate to imprison the offender, the court may, without
    implementing the sentence of imprisonment imposed on such
    offender, suspend such imprisonment.

            (2)     Suspension of the sentence of imprisonment under
  sub-section (1) may be made until three years from the date of its
  determination.

            (3)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
  (1), no sentence of imprisonment imposed on an offender other than a
  child held guilty of any of the following offences may be suspended:

                  (a)   murder,

                  (b)   rape,




                                                                      19
          (c)     human trafficking and transportation,

          (d)     arms, ammunition and explosive,

          (e)     corruption,

          (f)     taking of hostage and kidnapping,

          (g)     robbery,

          (h)     counterfeiting of currency or government
                  stamps,

          (i)     foreign exchange,

          (j)     offence relating to narcotic drug trafficking and
                  transaction,

          (k)      relating to ancient monument,

          (l)     relating to forest and wildlife,

          (m)     organized crime,

          (n)     money laundering,

          (o)     offence relating to torture or cruel, inhumane or
                  degrading treatment,

          (p)     crime against humanity.

   (4)         In making a order of suspension of the sentence of
imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1), the order shall be so
made that the offender is required to do the following during
the period of suspension:

         (a)      to do a public work for free,

         (b)      to assist in any work of the victim of the offence,




                                                                   20
            (c)       to refrain from doing any act or conduct set forth
                      in such order,

            (d)       to refrain from moving outside of his or her
                      residence or any particular place,

            (e)       to refrain from committing any offence during
                      the period of sentence or within three years of
                      the service of such sentence,

            (f)       to remain within any place specified by the
                      court,

            (g)       to remain in a treatment and rehabilitation
                      center,

            (h)       to refrain from meeting a particular person.

      (5)         Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(4), in making suspension of the sentence for a child pursuant to
sub-section (1), decision shall be made as follows, with or without
specifying the terms and conditions, having regard also to his or
her age and the circumstances of the commission of the offence:

            (a)      that any family member or guardian remind and
                     counsel him or her of good human conduct,

            (b)      that any service providing agency or individual
                     orient the child,

            (c)      that sole, group or family psychosocial counseling
                     service be provided to the child,

            (d)      that the child remain under the guardianship and
                     supervision of any family member, guardian,



                                                                     21
                      school, service provider individual or organization
                      for a certain term, subject to the compliance with
                      the specified terms and conditions.

            (6)    If the offender complies with the matters set forth in
      the order under sub-section (4) during the period of suspension,
      the offender shall be deemed to have served the sentence of
      imprisonment determined pursuant to sub-section (1).

            (7)    If the offender violates the order under sub-section
      (4), the court shall revoke the order under sub-section (1).

            (8)    After the order has been revoked pursuant to sub-
      section (7), such offender shall serve the whole of the sentence of
      imprisonment imposed on him or her in prison.



25.   Power to make order to send offender to reform home: (1) If,
      in relation of an offender who is sentenced to imprisonment for a
      term of two years or less, having regard also to the offence
      committed by the offender, the age, conduct of the offender, the
      circumstances and the manner of the commission of the offence, it
      appears to the court that it is appropriate to hold him or her in a
      reform home instead of sending him or her to prison, the court
      may, on recommendation of a probation officer, send such
      offender to the reform home.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
      (1), an offender who has committed any offence set forth in sub-
      section (3) of Section 24 shall not be sent to such reform home.




                                                                         22
            (3)    In sending an offender to a reform home pursuant to
      sub-section (1), the terms and conditions as determined by the
      Probation and Parole Board, to be compiled with by him or her,
      shall also be specified.

            (4)    If the offender serves the term of imprisonment in a
      reform home in compliance with the terms and conditions under
      sub-section (3), he or she shall be deemed to have served such
      term in prison.

            (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, if the offender does not reform his or her conduct or fails
      to comply with the terms and conditions under sub-section (3) or
      commits any offence punishable by imprisonment during that
      period, he or she must serve/spend the whole period of
      imprisonment under this Section in prison.



26.   Power to make order to send offender to rehabilitation center:
      (1) If, in relation of an offender who is convicted of using narcotic
      drug or who is suffering from physical or mental infirmity or
      similar other offender, having regard to the offence committed by
      the offender, the age, conduct of the offender and the
      circumstances of the commission of the offence, it appears to the
      court that it is appropriate to send him or her to a rehabilitation
      center instead of sending him or her to prison, the court may, on
      recommendation of a probation officer, send such offender to the
      rehabilitation center.




                                                                        23
      Explanation:     For      the   purpose   of     this   Section,
"rehabilitation center" means an organization established with the
aim of providing treatment and rehabilitative services to the
offenders who are drug or other addicts or who are suffering from
physical or mental infirmity.

      (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), an offender who has committed any offence set forth in sub-
section (3) of Section 24 shall not be sent to a rehabilitation
center.

      (3)    In sending an offender to a rehabilitation center
pursuant to sub-section (1), the terms and conditions to be
compiled with by him or her shall also be specified.

      (4)    If the offender serves the term of imprisonment in a
rehabilitation center in compliance with the terms and conditions
under sub-section (3), he or she shall be deemed to have served
such term of imprisonment in prison.

      (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the offender remaining in a rehabilitation center does
not reform his or her conduct or fails to comply with the terms and
conditions under sub-section (3) or commits any offence
punishable by imprisonment during that period, he or she must
serve/spend the whole period of imprisonment under this Section
in prison.




                                                                   24
27.   Service of imprisonment in prison on the weekend or during
      the night only: (1) If, in relation of an offender sentenced to
      imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, having regard to,
      inter alia, the offence committed by the offender, his or her age,
      conduct, the gravity of the offence and the manner of the
      commission of the offence, it appears to the court that it is not
      appropriate to hold him or her regularly in prison, the court may,
      for reasons to be recorded, so determine the sentence of
      imprisonment that such offender is required to remain in prison
      only on the weekend or only during the night on daily basis.

             (2)      Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
      (1), an offender who has committed any offence set forth in sub-
      section (3) of Section 24 shall not be sentenced to the punishment
      under this Section.

            (3)       In determining the sentence under sub-section (1), the
      court my specify the terms and conditions to be compiled with by
      the offender.

            (4)       If the offender held in prison pursuant to sub-section
      (1) serves such term of imprisonment in compliance with the
      terms and conditions under sub-section (3), he or she shall be
      deemed to have served such imprisonment in prison.

            (5)       If the offender held in prison pursuant to sub-section
      (1) fails to comply with the terms and conditions under sub-
      section (3) or commits any offence punishable by imprisonment
      during that period, he or she must serve/spend the whole period
      of imprisonment imposed on him or her in prison.




                                                                         25
28.   Power to make order to hold offender in open prison: (1) The
      judge of the concerned District Court may, on recommendation of
      the chief of Prison Office, make an order to hold in open prison an
      offender who has served two-thirds of the term of imprisonment
      and has good conduct.

            Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "open prison"
      means any place specified by the Government of Nepal in a
      manner that a prisoner may work during the specified time even
      outside of the place where he or her is held.

                (2)   In sending an offender to an open prison pursuant to
      sub-section (1), terms and conditions to be complied with by the
      offender shall also be specified.

                (3)   If the offender sent to an open prison pursuant to sub-
      section (1) fails to comply with the terms and conditions under
      sub-section      (2) or commits       any offence punishable by
      imprisonment during that period, he or she must serve/spend the
      whole period of imprisonment imposed on him or her in prison.



29.   Power to make order to place offender on parole: (1) The judge
      of the District Court may, on recommendation of the concerned
      District Probation and Parole Board, make an order to place on
      parole an offender who, upon being sentenced to imprisonment for
      more than one year, has served two-thirds of the sentence and has
      good conduct.

            Provided that the following offender may not be placed on
      parole:



                                                                          26
   (a)    One who has been sentenced to life imprisonment,

   (b)    One who has been sentenced for the offence of
          corruption,

   (c)    One who has been sentenced for the offence of
          rape,

   (d)    One who has been sentenced for the offence of
          human trafficking and transportation,

   (e)    One who has been sentenced for the offence of
          organized crime,

   (f)    One who has been sentenced for the offence of
          money laundering,

   (g)    One who has been sentenced for an offence
          related to torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading
          treatment,

   (h)    One who has been sentenced for the offence of
          crime against humanity,

   (i)    One who has been sentenced for an offence
          relating to the crime against the state.

Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "parole"
means permission for a prisoner who has served two-thirds
of the term of the sentence of imprisonment imposed on him
or her to serve the remaining term by spending life in the
society, subject to the compliance with the specified terms
and conditions, under the supervision of the parole officer.




                                                           27
             (2)     In making an order pursuant to sub-section (1), the
      terms and conditions so determined by the Probation and Parole
      Board as to be complied with by such offender during the period
      of parole shall also be specified.

             (3)     The parole officer shall monitor whether or not the
      offender has complied with the terms and conditions under sub-
      section (2).

             (4)     If the offender on parole under sub-section (1)
      complies with the terms and conditions under sub-section (2), the
      sentence of imprisonment imposed on him or her shall be deemed
      to have been served.

             (5)     If the offender on parole under sub-section (1) fails to
      comply with the terms and conditions under sub-section (2) or
      commits any offence punishable by imprisonment during that
      period, he or she must serve/spend the remaining period of
      imprisonment imposed on him or her in prison.

             (6)     Other provisions relating to parole shall be as
      prescribed.



30.   To have socialization: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
      this Act and other law, a prison may release an offender who,
      upon being sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one
      year, is serving the sentence and bears good conduct, from prison
      on monthly or daily basis, for the following purpose, six months
      before the expiry of the term of imprisonment imposed on him or
      her:



                                                                          28
                     (a)   family reunion,

                     (b)   establishment of social, cultural relation,

                     (c)   social assimilation and rehabilitation,

                     (d)   carrying on a business or employment,

                     (e)   taking skill or employment-oriented training.

            (2)      In releasing an offender from prison pursuant to sub-
      section (1), terms and conditions to be complied with by such
      offender shall also be specified.

            (3)      In releasing an offender pursuant to sub-section (1),
      the period and time to be spent for such purpose shall also be
      specified.

            (4)      The person released pursuant to sub-section (1) shall
      submit a weekly report on the work he or she has done to the
      concerned prison.

            (5)      If a person released pursuant to sub-section (1) fails
      to comply with the terms and conditions under sub-section (2) or
      commits any offence during that period, he or she shall
      serve/spend the remaining period of imprisonment in prison.



31.   Engagement in physical labor in lieu of imprisonment: (1) If an
      offender who is above the age of 18 and physically fit, and has
      been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three years or more
      so desires, the offender may be engaged in physical labor for
      public work.




                                                                           29
            (2)    The sentence of imprisonment imposed on an
      offender who is engaged in physical labor for public work
      pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be deducted by additional one day
      in lieu of the labor done for every three days.

            (3)    Other provisions relating to engagement in physical
      labor for public work shall be as prescribed.



32.   Prisoner may be allowed to leave prison: A prison may, in the
      following circumstance, permit a prisoner who, upon being
      sentenced   to     imprisonment,    is   serving    the   sentence   of
      imprisonment in the prison to go out of the prison with necessary
      security:

                   (a)     in the event of a close relative having fallen ill,
                           to visit such patient on condition that he or she
                           shall return to the prison on the same day,

                   (b)     in the event of the death of a relative of whom
                           crematory or obsequies rites have to be
                           performed by the prisoner himself or herself, to
                           perform such crematory or obsequies rites on
                           condition that he or she shall return to the
                           prison on the specified day.



33.   Reformative programs to be conducted: (1) In order to reform
      the conduct of prisoners serving the sentences of imprisonment, a
      prison shall conduct reformative programs and measures,
      including skill, education and employment oriented, morality,



                                                                           30
      disciplinary, physical, spiritual, meditation and exercise related
      education programs.

            (2)      A prison shall, in every sixth months, submit to the
      Probation and Parole Board a report setting out whether or not the
      prisoners have made significant reforms in their conduct as a
      result of the programs and measures conducted pursuant to sub-
      section (1).

            (3)      Other provisions relating to reformative programs
      shall be as prescribed.



34.    Prisoner to be kept in hospital or similar other place: (1) If
       any offender sentenced to imprisonment pursuant to this Act
       becomes of unsound mind, the prison shall keep such offender in
       a hospital or similar other medical center.

            (2)      The period during which an offender is kept in a
       hospital or medical center pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
       included in the period of the sentence of imprisonment served by
       the offender.



35.    Computation of fractions of sentence: In imposing a fraction
       of sentence under this Act, a sentence of imprisonment for life
       shall be reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for twenty-five
       years and the fraction of sentence thereof shall be imposed and
       executed in accordance with law.




                                                                      31
36.    Execution of sentence of imprisonment imposed for different
       offences: In imposing the sentence of imprisonment for more
       than one offence on a person who, upon being sentenced to
       imprisonment, is serving the sentence of imprisonment, the
       sentence of imprisonment shall be imposed and executed as
       follows:

                   (a)   where    the   period   of    the   sentence   of
                         imprisonment under the previous judgment is
                         longer than or equal to that of imprisonment
                         under the latter judgment, the sentence of
                         imprisonment imposed under the previous
                         judgment shall be executed;

                   (b)   where    the   period   of    the   sentence   of
                         imprisonment under the latter judgment is
                         longer than that of imprisonment under the
                         previous judgment, the period of the sentence
                         of imprisonment under the latter judgment
                         shall be added to the extent it is longer than the
                         previous judgment.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
      (1), if a sentence of imprisonment is imposed for another offence
      on a person who is sentenced to imprisonment for any offence
      prior to completion of the previous sentence, the latter sentence of
      imprisonment shall be so executed as to be computed after the
      completion of the period of the previous imprisonment.

            (3)    Where a person is sentenced, in the same case, to
      various sentences of imprisonment for various offences in


                                                                        32
      accordance with the laws in force, only the sentence of
      imprisonment for the offence which is the longest of such
      sentences shall be executed.

            (4)    If the sentences of imprisonment imposed under sub-
      section (3) are equal, only one of such sentences shall be executed.

            (5)    Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
      Section, where a separate sentence is provided by law for a
      recidivist or a consolidated offence, such sentence shall be
      executed.



37.   Remission of imprisonment: If an offender, except the following
      offender, has served three-fourth of the sentence of imprisonment
      and has reformed his or her conduct while in prison, the prison
      may make remission as prescribed from the sentence of
      imprisonment passed on him or her:

             (a)   one who has been sentenced to imprisonment for life,

            (b)    one who has been sentenced for the offence of rape,

            (c)    one who has been sentenced for the offence of
                   corruption,

            (d)    one who has been sentenced for the offence of human
                   trafficking and transportation,

            (e)    one who has been sentenced for the offence of taking
                   of hostage and kidnapping,

            (f)    one who has been sentenced for the offence of
                   organized crime,



                                                                         33
            (g)    one who has been sentenced for the offence of money
                   laundering,

            (h)    one who has been sentenced for an offence related to
                   torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment,

            (i)    one who has been sentenced for the offence of crime
                   against humanity.



38.   Probation and Parole Board: (1) There shall be a Federal
      Probation and Parole Board, as follows, also to render assistance
      in the social rehabilitation and integration of the offenders
      sentenced to imprisonment:

                  (a)   Attorney General                   - Chairperson

                  (b)   Secretary, Ministry of Law,
                        Justice    and     Parliamentary
                        Affairs                               - Member

                  (c)   Secretary, Ministry of Home
                        Affairs                               - Member

                  (d)   Two psychologists, including
                        one woman to the extent of
                        availability, designated by the
                        concerned Ministry                    - Member

                  (e)   Inspector General, Nepal
                        Police                                - Member




                                                                        34
            (f)   Criminologist or penologist
                  designated by the concerned
                  Ministry                                 - Member

            (g)   Director General, Department
                  of Prison Management            - Member Secretary

      (2)     There shall be a State Probation and Parole Board as
follows in each State, which is under the direct guidance, control
and supervision of the Probation and Parole Board:

            (a)   Chief Attorney                          - Chairman

            (b)   Secretary, State Ministry of
                  Law                                      - Member

            (c)   Secretary, State Ministry of
                  Home Affairs                             - Member

            (d)   Chief of Police, State Police

            (e) Two psychologists, including
                  one woman to the extent of
                  availability, designated by the
                  State Government                         - Member

            (f)   Criminologist or penologist
                  designated by the State
                  Government                               - Member

            (g)   Chief of the State body
                  responsible for prison
                  management                      - Member Secretary




                                                                  35
39.   Functions, duties and powers of Probation and Parole Board:
      (1) In addition to the functions, duties and powers mentioned
      elsewhere in this Act, the functions, duties and powers of the
      Federal Probation and Parole Board shall be as follows:

            (a)    to formulate a probation and parole policy and
                   recommend it to the Government of Nepal,

            (b)    to develop standards for placing prisoners on
                   probation and parole,

            (c)    to develop terms and conditions to be abided by the
                   offenders who are released on probation and parole,

            (d)    to supervise, control activities of, and give direction,
                   as required, to the State Probation and Parole Board,

            (e)    to prepare a roster of persons who can be appointed
                   or designated as the probation officer or parole
                   officer, as required to make recommendation as to the
                   execution of sentences and to assist in the
                   rehabilitation of offenders pursuant to this Act,

            (f)    to carry out other necessary matters relating to
                   probation and parole.

            (2)    The Probation and Parole Board shall, on its own,
      determine the rules of procedures required for the performance of
      its functions.

            (3)    The Probation and Parole Board may, as required,
      form a sub-committee to render assistance in its functions.




                                                                         36
            (4)    The terms of reference, rules of procedures and other
      necessary matters of a sub-committee formed pursuant to sub-
      section (3) shall be as specified by the Probation and Parole
      Board.

            (5)    The functions, duties and powers of the State
      Probation and Parole Board shall be as prescribed.



40.   Computation of period of imprisonment: (1) The period of
      imprisonment shall be computed from the date of custody or
      detention of the offender, if so held in custody or detention, and
      from the date that the offender is held in prison, if not held in
      custody or detention.

            (2)    The period of imprisonment under sub-section (1)
      shall not include the day of release from detention or prison.




                                                                       37
                                     Chapter – 6

                        Provision Relating to Compensation



41.   Payment of compensation to be ordered: (1) If any injury is
      caused to the victim's body, life, property or reputation as a result
      of any offence, the court shall order that a reasonable amount of
      compensation be paid by the offender to the victim for such injury.

            Provided that if a law provides for a separate compensation
      for any offence, the law shall apply accordingly.

            (2)    The amount of compensation under sub-section (1)
      shall be determined, having regard to the following matters:

                  (a)      physical, bodily, mental and emotional injury
                           caused to the victim,

                  (b)      where the victim has died, the injury caused to
                           his or her heir,

                  (c)      the offender's financial source and condition,

                  (d)      condition of the victim and his or her dependant,

                  (e)      such   other       matters   as   the   Court   holds
                           appropriate.

            (3)    The amount of compensation under sub-section (1)
      shall be ordered to include the medical expenses if the victim has
      sustained hurt or grievous hurt as a result of the offence, and the
      funeral and obsequies expenses, if the victim has died.

            (4)     Where an offender has caused damage to the
      victim's property, the court shall, in ordering the payment of


                                                                              38
      compensation, order that such property be restituted in its
      original position.

            (5)    If a property cannot be restituted in its original
      position, the amount of compensation shall be ordered to be paid
      according to the price of such property where the price is set, and
      where the price cannot be so set, according to the price of such
      property that can be set at the time when damage was caused to it
      or the sentence passed.

            (6)    Payment of compensation may be ordered to be in
      cash or kind or both.

            (7)    If the victim of an offence has died prior to the
      payment of compensation pursuant to sub-section (1), the amount
      of compensation under sub-section (1) shall be ordered to be paid
      to his or her dependent heir.



42.   Compensation to be paid immediately: (1) The offender shall
      immediately pay the amount of compensation passed under this
      Section.

            (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
      (1), if such person, being unable to pay the compensation
      immediately, furnishes any property as the security for such
      compensation, the court may order the offender to so pay the
      compensation in a maximum of three installments that such
      amount is paid up within one year.




                                                                      39
43.   Compensation to be borne by each offender: In making an
      order for the payment of compensation for more than one offender
      in relation to any offence, such order shall be so made that each
      offender pay the compensation according to the degree of the
      offending.


44.   To be as per agreement: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
      elsewhere in this Chapter, the victim and the offender can enter
      into agreement on payment of compensation in relation to any
      offence.
            (2)    If the agreement under sub-section (1) is found
      reasonable, the court may make order for the compensation as per
      such agreement.


45.   Imprisonment for non-payment of compensation: (1) If an
      offender who is required to pay compensation does not pay the
      amount of compensation within the period specified for its
      payment, compensation shall be ordered to be paid to the victim
      by making attachment to such offender's property.
            (2)    If the amount of compensation cannot be recovered
      from the property attached pursuant to sub-section (1) or if the
      offender required to pay compensation fails to do so, he or she
      shall be imprisoned by converting the amount of compensation
      into imprisonment at the rate of three hundred rupees for a day.
            (3)    Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and
      the other laws, imprisonment under sub-section (2) shall not
      exceed four years.




                                                                         40
                               Chapter – 7

                              Miscellaneous



46.   Sentence Recommendation Committee: There shall be a
      Sentence Recommendation Committee, as follows, also for the
      making of sentencing policy:

           (a)    Attorney General                            - Chairman

           (b)    Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and
                  Parliamentary Affairs                        - Member

           (c)    Inspector General, Nepal Police              - Member

           (d)    One person designated by the
                  Government of Nepal from amongst the
                  persons having gained at lest fifteen
                  years of experience in the field of crime
                  investigation or the penologists             - Member

           (e)    One person designated by the
                  Government of Nepal from amongst the
                  persons having gained at least ten years
                  of experience in the rehabilitation of
                  offenders                                   - Member



47.   Functions, duties and powers of the Committee: (1) The
      functions, duties and powers of the Committee shall be as
      follows:




                                                                      41
            (a)      to develop standards for the determination of
                     appropriate range of sentence to be imposed on
                     the offender according to the gravity of offence,

            (b)      to conduct study and research the on prevailing
                     penal   policy   and   give   suggestion   to   the
                     Government of Nepal for reform thereof,

            (c)      to make opinion, advice and suggestion on
                     sentence to be imposed in relation to any specific
                     type of offences,

            (d)      to collect, update and analyze data/records of the
                     offenders and give suggestion to the Government
                     of Nepal on punishment,

            (e)      if there appears a need for making any reform in
                     the laws in force on punishment, to give
                     suggestion to the Government of Nepal for that
                     purpose.

       (2)        The Committee shall, on its own, determine the rules
of procedures required for the performance of its functions.

      (3)         The Committee may, as required, form a sub-
committee to render assistance in its functions.

      (4)         The terms of reference, rules of procedures and other
necessary matters of a sub-committee formed pursuant to sub-
section (3) shall be as specified by the Committee.




                                                                         42
48.   Victim relief fund to be established: (1) There shall be
      established a fund entitled the victim relief fund for the provision
      of relief to the victim of offence.

            (2)    The Government of Nepal shall credit into the fund
      established pursuant to sub-section (1) fifty percent of the amount
      recovered for a fine under the court or of the amount paid by an
      offender sentenced to imprisonment as a fine in lieu of such
      imprisonment, in accordance with the Penal Code.

            (3)    In addition to the amount to be credited pursuant to
      sub-section (2), any amount as so provided by law or received
      from the Government of Nepal or any other source shall be
      credited into the fund under sub-section (1).

            (4)    The operation of the fund under sub-section (1),
      classification of victims, grounds for the provision of relief
      amount to the victims from the fund, limits of such amount and
      procedure for its distribution shall be as prescribed.



49.   Designation of probation officer or social activist: (1) The
      Government of Nepal may appoint or designate those persons who
      are experienced in rehabilitation or community service as the
      probation officer or parole officer.

            (2)    The qualification, terms of service and facilities of
      the probation officer or parole officer under sub-section (1) shall
      be as prescribed.

50.   Power to make rules: The rules may be framed by the Supreme
      Court on the matters relating to court proceedings and by the



                                                                       43
      Government of Nepal on the other matters, as required to
      implement the objectives of this Act.



51.   Power to make manuals: The Government of Nepal may make
      and enforce necessary manuals subject to this Act and the Rules
      framed hereunder.




                                                                   44
