                                                               www.lawcommission.gov.np



                               Evidence Act, 2031

                                                    Date of Authentication and publication
                                                       2031.7.5 (1974 Oct. 21)

Amendment Acts
Evidence (First Amendment) Act, 2034 (1977)             2034 .5.27

                                 Act no. 24 of year 2031

              An Act made to amend and consolidate the Law of Evidence
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to amend and consolidate the Nepalese law of
Evidence;
      Now, therefore, be it enacted by His Majesty the king Birendra Bir Bikram
Shahdev on the aid and advise and consent of the Rastriya Panchayat.


                                      CHAPTER-1
                                    PRELIMINARY
1.    Short Title, Extent and Commencement: (1) This Act may be called the
      "Evidence Act, 2031".
              (2) This Act shall apply to all proceedings of a case before the Court.
             (3) This Act shall come into force on the first day of Baisakh, 2032.
2.    Definitions: In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires;
             (a)    "Court" also includes any other Authority who hears a case.
             (b)    "Already Expressed" or "Expressed" means already expressed or
                    expressed in an oral or written form or through a sign.
             (c)    "Public Document" means-
                    (1)    A document maintaining official records of the acts performed
                           by the Government of Nepal.
                    (2)    A book, paper or any other document laying as a record in the
                           office of the Government of Nepal or Constitutional Body or



                                             1
                                                                 www.lawcommission.gov.np


                            Authority or Court or public organization incorporated under
                            the law.


                                       CHAPTER-2
              FACTS IN WHICH EVIDENCE MAY BE EXAMINED
         AND FACTS NOT REQUIRED TO EXAMINE THE EVIDENCE


3.    Facts in which evidence may be examined: The court may examine evidence on
      the fact in issue which is to be decided by it and the relevant fact thereof.
             Explanation:- "Relevant fact" means a fact which helps to prove or
      disprove the fact in issue of the case to be decided.
4.    Facts not required to examine the evidence: It shall not be necessary to examine
      evidence on the following facts-
             (a)     If the fact expressed by a party to the case is admitted by the other
                     party in the written form,
                            Provided that, the court, if thinks appropriate may examine
                     evidence on such fact.
             (b)     Facts to be taken as judicial notice by the court pursuant to Section 5
             (2) It shall not be necessary to the court to examine any evidence to
      presume any fact pursuant to Section 6 and 7.
             Provided that, the court may examine evidence, as required, before making
      presumption on the facts as mentioned in Section 7.
(5)   Facts to be taken into judicial notice by the court: (1) The court shall take
      judicial notice of the following facts-∇
              (a)
                    (1)
                    (2)

∇
  (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) section 5 deal with the king or other
relative matters.


                                              2
                                                                www.lawcommission.gov.np


                     (3)
                     (4)
                     (5)
                     (6)
                     (7)
                     (8)
               (b)
               (c)
               (d)    Geographical position of Nepal
               (e)    Constitution of Nepal and Nepal law
               (f)    Notice published in Nepal Gazette
               (2)    The court may take judicial notice of the undisputed facts of general
      knowledge.
               Provided that, if, pursuant to this Sub- section, a party to the case requests
      to take judicial notice of any fact, the court may issue an order to that party to
      submit required evidence regarding that fact and the court may deny to take the
      judicial notice of that fact unless evidence is produced to the satisfaction of the
      court.
               (3)The court may take the help of any book or document to take judicial
      notice pursuant to this Section.
(6)   The court shall presume the facts: Unless otherwise proved-
               (a)    The property, in the name of any co-partner of a joint family, shall be
                      presumed by the court that such property is a joint property.
               (b)    The property, in the possession or use of two or more persons, shall
                      be presumed by the court that all of them have equal right on that
                      property.
               (c)    The Court shall presume that the matters recorded in the accounts
                      (sayha), Papers (shresta) or documents (kagajat) to be recorded in



                                              3
                                                            www.lawcommission.gov.np


                 pursuance of law by any court or government office are correctly
                 recorded.
           (d)   The baby, born during the continuance of marriage of the husband
                 and wife or within two hundred and seventy two days of the
                 dissolution of the marriage or the death of the husband, shall be
                 presumed by the court that the baby is the child of the same husband.
           (e)   Any document, so indicated that it is published, prepared or attested
                 (certified) by any court or government office or official or by a
                 person so authorized by the Nepal law shall be presumed by the court
                 that it has been published or prepared or attested (certified) by such
                 court, office, official or person.
           (f)   Any law or judicial decision printed in a book or journal and where it
                 has been indicated that it is published by the government of a foreign
                 country or by the official so authorized by such government, the
                 court shall presume that such law or decision has been published
                 correctly.
7.   The court may presume: Unless otherwise provides:-
           (a)   If a person is holding a stolen property with him / her, the court may
                 presume that the property is either stolen by him/her or purchased
                 knowingly that it is a stolen property.
                        Provided that, if such person shows any reasonable ground to
                 remain that property in his / her possession or it seems reasonable to
                 remain such property in his/her possession by virtue of his/her
                 profession or trade and it is laying with him/her without knowing
                 that it is a stolen property, the court may not presume on that way.
           (b)   If the court issues an order to a person to submit a document which
                 he / she holds and he/she does not submit accordingly, the court may
                 presume that the document may have evidential value against such
                 person.


                                           4
                                                              www.lawcommission.gov.np


           (c)    If any incident, conduct of the persons or general trend of the acts-
                  transactions reasonably leads towards certain presumption, the court
                  may presume other facts accordingly.


                                        CHAPTER-3
           FACTS TO BE TAKEN OR NOT TO BE TAKEN AS EVIDENCE
8.   Facts to be taken as evidence: The facts to be taken as evidence under this
     Chapter and other facts stated by the witness before the court may be taken as
     evidence in the course of examining evidence pursuant to Section 3.
9.   Facts expressed by the party: (1) Any fact expressed by the party to a case may
     be taken as evidence against him/her.
           (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub- section (1),
           (a)    The fact expressed by the accused of a criminal case, in a place other
                  than the court regarding the charge made against him/her, may be
                  taken as evidence, when the court finds it as following-
                   (1)    At the time of expression, the accused was conscious and in a
                          position to understand what he/she did or expressed.
                    (2)   The fact was not expressed putting pressure on him/her or
                          with torture to him/her or with a threat to torture to him/her or
                          any other person or putting him/her in a condition to express
                          the fact against his / her will.
                  (3)     The public official, while conducting a process had not given
                          any threat or promise in relation to any charge, by which there
                          was a possibility of expressing any untrue fact and he /she had
                          reasonably believed that such official had a power and
                          authority to implement the threat or the promise.
           (b)    Any fact, mentioned in from Clause (a) to (d) of Section 12 and any
                  other fact which may be taken as evidence under any of the Sections



                                             5
                                                                  www.lawcommission.gov.np


                      of this Chapter, may be taken as an evidence even in his/her favour
                      although it was expressed by him/herself, if he/she so desires.
             (c)      A fact accepted by a person for the purpose of reaching to a
                      compromise, by giving up any claim as a whole or in part or agreeing
                      to pay any amount or to provide any service to any other person, may
                      not be taken as an evidence against that person.
            (3) For the purpose of this Section, the following facts expressed by the
      following persons shall be considered to have been expressed by the party
      him/herself:-
            (a)       The fact expressed by the attorney (waris) of the party or by the
                      representative of the party to a case, in the capacity of an attorney or
                      a representative, pursuant to prevailing law,
            (b)       Any fact expressed by a person so authorized to act upon on behalf
                      of the party till such authority remains valid and up to the scope of
                      the authority,
            (c)       Any fact expressed by a person on such matter he/she deserves
                      ownership or economic interest till such ownership or interest is
                      valid and before the party to the case gets any right in the subject
                      matter of the case,
            (d)       Any fact expressed by a person regarding the subject matter of the
                      case on which there was a joint ownership or economic interest
                      between such person and party to the case.
10.   Immediately expressed fact: (1) If any of the following persons express any fact
      immediately or immediate before or after, regarding any act, incident or
      condition/situation such fact may be taken as evidence:
            (a)       The person who had done that act or who had directly seen or known
                      the act, incident or condition/situation,
            (b)       The victim of the act, incident or condition/situation.



                                               6
                                                              www.lawcommission.gov.np


            (2) If any person expresses any fact clearly knowing his/her physical or
      mental condition till the continuation to such condition the fact so expressed may
      be taken as evidence.
11.   Facts expressed by a person when in the normal condition who is now dead:
      The fact expressed by a person, who is dead but who expressed it in the dying
      stage when he/she was in a normal condition regarding to the cause of his or her
      death, may be taken as evidence.
12.   Special Facts Expressed by the Persons in Special Situation, Condition, or
      Position: The following facts expressed by the person who is dead, whose
      whereabouts could not be located or who is incompetent to be a witness or who has
      privilege not to be a witness pursuant to this Act or for whom the party to the case
      has proved that he/she cannot appear before the Court due to the conspiracy of the
      opposing party or who is in such a position that the Court cannot issue a summon
      or a person as to whom the Court finds it inappropriate to call him/her due to the
      process being expensive or time consuming,
            (a)    Any fact expressed against the right, interest or benefit of the person
                   him/herself.
            (b)    The fact expressed in a written form which could lead towards legal
                   action or criminal charge (acquisition) against him/her.
            (c)    Any fact expressed in a written form, before filing of the case,
                   regarding any public interest or custom specially known to him/her.
            (d)    Any fact expressed in a written form, before filing the case,
                   regarding any relationship specially known to him/her.
13.   Facts mentioned in the public document: (1) Facts mentioned in any public
      document, by the public officer in the course discharging of a public duty required
      for his/her position and by any other person in performance of a duty prescribed by
      the law, may be taken as evidence.
            (2) Facts mentioned in the documents, relating to any Maps, Charts or Data
      (facts and figures) generally offered for public sale, which are published by the


                                            7
                                                               www.lawcommission.gov.np


      government of Nepal or by a person or public institution authorized by the
      Government of Nepal, may be taken as evidence.
14.   Facts mentioned in the Books of Account, Private Entries (Bahi) Books or
      other Records (Shresta) in a regular basis: Any fact regularly posted or
      mentioned in the books of Account, Private Entries (Bahi) Books or other Records
      (Shresta) in the course of any act, process or profession or any letter written,
      receipt, series of letters (Chalani) or any other particulars may be taken as
      evidence.
15.   Facts written in the Book or Article: (1) Statement of facts on the law and
      decision contained in the Books published by the Government of Foreign State or
      by a person or an organization authorized by such government regarding the law or
      the decision of the court of that State, may be taken as evidence.
             (2) Facts mentioned in the published Book or Article written by a person
      renowned as a Scholar in that field (Subject) may be taken as evidence.
16.   Special types of Data, Index etc.: Facts mentioned in the data (facts and figure),
      detail out index, particulars or articles, regularly published for the consumption of
      the specific professions may be taken as evidence.
17.   Facts stated by the witness in other cases: The facts stated by the witness in a
      case before the court may be taken as evidence in any other case in the following
      conditions,-
             (a)     In case, the witness has been dead or has become incompetent to be a
                     witness pursuant to this Act, or
             (b)     In case, the witness has privilege not to provide evidence on that
                     matter (fact) pursuant to this Act, or
             (c)     In case, the party to a case proves that the witness can not be
                     produced before the court due to any conspiracy of the opposite
                     party, or
             (d)     In case a Notice can not be issued against him/her, or



                                              8
                                                                    www.lawcommission.gov.np


                 (e)      In case, it becomes inappropriate in the opinion of the court to
                          produce him/her due to it being time consuming or expensive.
18.      Document prepared in the course of inquiry or examination: The fact
         expressed by a person in the document prepared in the course of inquiry or
         examination of any act, incident or situation/ condition pursuant to the prevailing
         law, may be taken as evidence, in case he/she appears before the court and records
         his/her statement as an witness.
                 
                     Provided that,
                 (a)      In case, there is no issue between the parties to the case on the facts
                          mentioned by the expert in the Post-mortem Report or the fact so
                          mentioned is not inconsistent with the evidence if any, such fact may
                          be taken, as evidence even if the expert does not appear before the
                          court.
                  (b)     An opinion expressed by a person, in the deed of and deed of spot
                          investigation sarjameen done bye the Investigating Officer in the
                          course of investigation, may taken as evidence for the purpose of
                          remand even such person does not appeal before the court as witness.
19.      Note (Nissa) or Certificate: A Note or Certificate, issued by a person having the
         duty of issuing such Note or Certificate, may be taken as evidence
20.      Report: Any observation (Tippani) or Report, written or prepared in the course of
         discharging of duty, by a person who has a legal duty to prepare the observation
         (Tippani) or Report and submit it to a specific place or an office regarding any act,
         incident or situation/condition pursuant to the prevailing Nepal Law, may be taken
         as evidence.
                 Provided that, the observation (Tippani) or Report should have been duly
         registered in the specific place or office.





    Amended by the first Amendment.


                                                  9
                                                                 www.lawcommission.gov.np


21.   Other documents with evidential value: In addition to the document mentioned
      from Section 9 to Section 20, any other document may be taken as evidence to
      prove that such document exists.
22.   Material (Dashi) Evidence: Any material or object related to the case and
      identified by the witness before the court may be taken as evidence.
23.   Personal Opinion: (1) If the court has to reach to a conclusion of any opinion,
      regarding law of a foreign country, science, art, signature or finger impression,
      opinion of the expert may be taken as evidence.
             Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, the term "expert" means a
      person who has acquired special knowledge through special study or training or
      experience in any field (subject).
             (2) If the court has to reach to a conclusion of the signature of a person, the
      opinion of a person who was in a position to see the signature of such person
      frequently and to identify it, may be taken as evidence.
             (3) If the court has to reach to a conclusion of the fact regarding any
      religious, ethnic or public interest or custom, the opinion of a person who is in a
      position to have special knowledge regarding the interest or custom may be taken
      as evidence.
             (4) If the court has to reach to a conclusion of any fact, regarding whether
      there is any bond or relation of a person with another person or not, the opinion of
      a person who has special information regarding the bond or relation, may be taken
      as evidence.
             (5) If the court has to reach to a conclusion about the meaning of the
      specific word or words (phrase) which is in use in some specific places, opinion of
      the person who is in a position to have special knowledge of the same, may be
      taken as evidence.
             (6) In case, opinion of a person is taken as evidence pursuant to this Section,
      the facts which support or refute the opinion or the grounds of the opinion may
      also be taken as evidence.


                                            10
                                                                www.lawcommission.gov.np


               (7) Any opinion expressed by a person may be taken as evidence only if
      he/she appears before the court in person as a witness.
               Provided that, to take any opinion or the ground of such opinion expressed
      in a book or article, of the expert, as an evidence it shall not be necessary to be
      produced by the writer of the book or article before the court in person.
24.   Facts not be taken as evidence: (1) Whether the character of the parties to the
      case is good or bad, shall not be taken as evidence.
               Provided that, if the court has to decide on the character of a party to the
      case, fact relating to the character may be taken as evidence.
               (2) In case, where a person is not permitted to express any fact pursuant to
      Section 41, 43 and 45 and even if that person expresses that fact, such fact may not
      be taken as evidence.
               (3) If the court issues order to produce a document to a party to the case and
      that party does not submit the same accordingly that evidence shall not be
      permitted to produce in that case without the permission of the other party or the
      court.
               (4) In addition to the facts specifically mentioned in this Section, any other
      facts which can not be taken as evidence pursuant to this Act or other prevailing
      Nepal laws, may not be taken as evidence.


                                        CHAPTER-4
                                  BURDEN OF PROOF

25.   Burden of proof of proving an offence: The burden of proof of proving that the
      accused has committed the offence in a criminal case shall lie on the plaintiff.
26.   Burden of proof of proving the claim: The burden of proof of proving the claim
      in a civil case shall lie on the plaintiff.
27.   Burden of proof on the Defendant: (1) If the defendant makes a counter claim
      (Jikir) regarding remission from the penalty or acquittal from the charge (penalty)



                                                11
                                                                 www.lawcommission.gov.np


      pursuant to prevailing Nepal law, the burden of proof of proving such fact shall lie
      on the defendant him/herself.
               (2) If some thing has to be paid or returned back to the plaintiff pursuant to
      the prevailing Nepal law, the burden of proving the fact that it has been already
      paid or returned back shall lie on the defendant.
28.   Burden of proof as to particular fact: The burden of proof as to any particular
      fact lies on that person who wishes to the court to believe in its existence, unless it
      is provided by any law that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person.
29.   Burden of proof to refute the presumption of the court: If a party to a case
      wishes to refute the presumption made by the court as to any fact pursuant to this
      Act, the burden of proving such fact shall lie on such party.
30.   Burden of proving fact specially within knowledge: When any fact is specially
      within the knowledge of any party, the burden of proving that fact shall lie on that
      party.
31.   Burden of proving one fact to prove the another fact: If it is necessary to prove
      any other fact earlier to take a fact as an evidence, to prove such other fact shall lie
      on that party who wants to produce the first fact as an evidence.
32.   Burden of proving that a person is Alive: Provided that, when the question is
      whether a person is alive or dead, it is proved that such person has not been heard
      of for a period of twelve years by those who would naturally have heard of him/her
      if he/she had been alive, the burden of proving that he/she is alive is shifted to the
      person who affirms it.
33.   Burden of proof as to ownership or possession of the property: When the
      question is whether any person is owner of any property of which he/she is shown
      to be in custody, possession or use, the burden of proving that he/she is not the
      owner lies on that party who affirms that he/she is not the owner.


                                       CHAPTER-5
                                       ESTOPPEL

                                              12
                                                                www.lawcommission.gov.np


34.   Estoppel: (1) When a person has, by writing, oral or conduct, acted or caused to
      act another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, such
      person shall not be allowed, in any case, between him/herself and such person to
      deny the truth of that thing.
             Provided that, this Section shall not be applicable in the point of law.
             (2) Anything mentioned in Sub-section (1) shall also be applicable to such
      person who receives/gets any kind of right from the persons        mentioned in that
      Sub-section     in    relation    to   the    subject    matter     of    the     case.


                                       CHAPTER-6
                           DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

35.   Documentary Evidence: (1) A document or fact mentioned in the document has
      to be proved by producing such document.
             (2) Notwithstanding contained in Sub-section (1), any document or any fact
      mentioned in the document may be proved with the help of the picture, photocopy
      or duplicate copy which has been duly received pursuant to the law or oral
      evidence in the following circumstances:
             (a)    When it has been proved that the document is in the custody of that
                    person against whom that document has to be produced, or
             (b)    When the document is in the custody of such person against whom
                    the court cannot issue Summon/Notice or such person did not
                    produce the document even after the service of the Summon/Notice,
                    or
             (c)    When it has been proved that the document has been lost or
                    destroyed, or
             (d)    When it is not easily possible to lift the document and produce it
                    before the court, or




                                             13
                                                                www.lawcommission.gov.np


             (e)    When that document does not lie with the intending party to produce
                    such document by virtue of the nature of the document itself.
                           Provided that, in the case of the document mentioned in this
                    Clause, it shall be necessary to produce the certified copy in case it is
                    possible to get such copy pursuant to the law.
             (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any Sub-section of this Section,
      the decision made or order issued by His Majesty the King or the Government of
      Nepal may be proved upon producing a document certified by the concerned
      officer pursuant to the prevailing Nepal Law.
36.   Conclusion of Signature or the Thumb impression: (1) When there arises a
      question, whether a document was written or signed or not by a person, the court
      may cause such person to write or sign in a separate piece of paper and shall
      compare that signature or thumb impression with any other signature or finger
      impression and may reach to the conclusion accordingly.
             (2) When it is not possible to reach to a conclusion comparing the signature
      or finger impression pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Court may conclude it with
      the help of other evidence.
             (3) Nothing contained in this Section shall bar to the Court to take the
      opinion of a signature or finger impression expert as the evidence.


                                      CHAPTER-7
                                    ORAL EVIDENCE
37.   Oral Evidence: (1) Except in the condition where it is compulsory to produce the
      document to prove any fact pursuant to this Act, in other conditions a fact may be
      proved by the oral evidence.
             (2) The oral evidence has to be direct in nature, to mean if the evidence has
      to be produced on the fact which could have been seen, heard or felt with the help
      of any sense that evidence has to be produced by the person who has directly seen,
      heard or felt, as an oral evidence.


                                            14
                                                                  www.lawcommission.gov.np


                   Explanation: The oral evidence given by a person as a witness before the
          court who hears or knows the fact in the mean time when it was expressed and
          which is admissible as an evidence pursuant to Section 10, 11 or 12, shall also be
          considered as direct evidence.


                                           CHAPTER-8
                                   EXAMINATION OF WITNESS

38.       Person Competent to be a witness: All persons including the accomplice may
          be competent to be a witness unless the court considers that they are prevented
          from understanding the questions put to them, or form giving rational answers to
          those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, physical or mental diseases or
          any other cause of the same kind.
39.       Dumb Witness: A witness who is unable to speak may give his/her evidence in
          any other manner in which he/she can make it intelligible, as by writing or by
          signs.
40.       Parents etc. of the party shall not be compelled to be a witness:
          Notwithstanding anything contained in other Sections of this Act or any other
          prevailing law, the parents, son, daughter, husband or wife of the party to the case
          shall not be compelled to be a witness against such party.
41.       Communication during marriage shall not be compelled to disclose: No person
          who is or has been married shall be compelled to disclose any communication
          made between them during their marriage and they shall be permitted to disclose
          any such communication, unless the person who made it consents, except in a case
          between the husband and wife or in a case in which one married person is
          prosecuted by the government as a plaintiff for any crime committed against the
          other spouse.




    Inserted by First Amendment.


                                               15
                                                                   www.lawcommission.gov.np


42.       A judge shall not be compelled to disclose any act done in that capacity: No
          judge shall, except otherwise order has been made by the Superior Court, be
          compelled to answer any question which came to his/her knowledge or regarding
          any act he/she performed in the court as such judge.
                    Provided that, he/she may be examined as a witness as to the matters which
          occurred in his/her presence whilst he/she was so acting or any other fact.
43.       Not to disclose the fact mentioned in the unpublished government document
          laying in the Government Office: Except otherwise provided by the Head of the
          Department no one shall disclose or submit any unpublished confidential document
          which is related to the government activities and laying in the Government Office.
44.       Public Official shall not be compelled to disclose any information received in
          that capacity: No Public Official shall be compelled to disclose any information
          which he/she received in the official confidence when he/she considers that such
          disclosure would suffer the public interest.

    44A. Police personnel shall not be compelled to disclose the source of information
          of the occurrence of a crime: No police personnel shall be compelled to disclose
          any information of the source which he/she received by any means regarding the
          occurrence of a crime.
45.       A law Practitioner not to disclose any information given by his/her client: (1)
          No law practitioner, shall at any time be permitted, unless with the written consent
          of his/her client's authority to disclose any communication made to him/her in the
          course of or for the purpose of his/her employments as a law practitioner, by or on
          behalf of his/her client or to state the contents or conditions of any document with
          which he/she has become acquainted in the course and for the purpose of his/her
          professional employment or to disclose any advice given by him/her to his/her
          client.





    Inserted by First Amendment.


                                                 16
                                                               www.lawcommission.gov.np




             Provided that,
             (a)    Any communication which has been provided to the law practitioner
                    in furtherance of any legal purpose may be disclosed by him/her.
             (b)    Any fact observed by the law practitioner in the course of his/her
                    employment as such, showing that any crime has been committed
                    since the commencement of his/her employment.
             (2) The restriction put on to the law practitioner pursuant to Sub-section (1)
      shall also be maintained even after his/her employment is ceased by the client and
      such restriction shall also be applicable to the clerk, servant and interpreter of the
      law practitioner.
             (3) In case any party to a case causes to his/her law practitioner to become a
      witness regarding any information pursuant to Sub-section (1), for the purpose of
      this Sub-section, it shall be considered that the party concerned has permitted to
      disclose such fact or information.
46.   A person shall not be compelled to disclose any communication between
      him/herself and his/her professional legal advisor: A person shall not be
      compelled to disclose any fact or communication exchanged between him/her and
      his/her professional legal advisor.
             Provided that, when such person wishes to disclose such communication on
      his/her own before the court, he/she has to disclose any other related fact which the
      court finds necessary to clarify the fact involved into the communication.
47.   Witness shall have to answer: A witness shall not be excused from answering any
      question upon the ground that the answer to such question may criminate him/her.
             Provided that, no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give,
      shall subject to him/her to any arrest or prosecution and shall not be taken as an
      evidence in any other criminal case.




                                             17
                                                                www.lawcommission.gov.np


48.   Production and Examination of witness: Subject to the provisions of the
      prevailing laws, witnesses shall be produced and examined in the order so
      prescribed by the court.
49.   Procedure relating to the Examination of the witness: (1) A witness shall be
      caused to swear/take oath to speak the truth before providing statement of facts
      regarding what he/she has seen, known or heard.
             (2) Witness shall be examined in the presence of all the parties to the case.
             Provided that, a witness may be examined in the presence of the parties who
      are present on the date and time appointed by the court for the examination of the
      witness.
             (3) A witness shall be examined in such a manner that the examination of
      one witness shall not be heard by another witness.
             (4) In case it becomes essential to further examine any witness, on the basis
      of any reasonable ground, a Tatimba (further examination) of a witness may be
      done only to the facts which were not clearly specified in the previous
      examination.
             (5) Parties to the case shall have to put signature on the top of the document
      of statement of the witness. In case any party denies to put his/her signature, the
      judge shall note the same and put his/her signature.
50.   Examination-in-chief and cross-examination: (1) In the course of examination
      of the witness, the party who calls the witness may conduct the examination-in-
      chief to his/her witness. Thereafter, the adverse party to the case, if so desires, may
      conduct the cross-examination.
             (2) After the completion of the cross-examination by the adverse party
      pursuant to Sub-section (1), the party who calls the witness may conduct the re-
      examination of such witness.
             Provided that, the re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of the
      facts referred to in the cross-examination.



                                            18
                                                                www.lawcommission.gov.np


             (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso of Sub-section (2), a
      party to the case may ask question regarding any new fact with his/her witness if it
      is so permitted by the court.
             Provided that, the adverse party may cross examine such witness again, if
      any question on new facts is asked in the course of re-examination.
             (4) In the course of conducting examination-in-chief or re-examination, the
      party to the case shall not ask any leading question, which suggest the intended
      answer if so objected by the adverse party.
             Provided that, such question may be asked with the permission of the court.
             (5) While providing permission by the court to ask any leading question
      with his/her witness to a party to the case pursuant to the proviso of Sub-section
      (4), the court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory in
      nature or undisputed or which have, on its opinion, already been proved
      sufficiently.
             (6) Notwithstanding contained in forgoing Sections, a party to a case may
      not conduct examination-in-chief by him/herself rather may request to the court for
      examination-in-chief and if so requested by the party, the court shall conduct the
      examination-in-chief; and the adverse may conduct cross-examination, if so
      intends, thereafter.
             Provided that,
             (a)      In case any witness has been examined by the court under this Sub-
                      section, the party calling such witness shall not be permitted to
                      conduct examination-in-chief or re-examination.
             (b)      A party to the case shall not be permitted to ask some of the witness
                      by him/herself pursuant to Clause (a) and to apply before the court to
                      ask question to some of other witness from the court pursuant to this
                      Clause.
51.   Court to forbid to ask unreasonable question with the witness: The court shall
      forbid to ask any question which could unnecessarily insult or annoy the witness.


                                             19
                                                                www.lawcommission.gov.np


52.   Examination-in-chief and cross examination of the expert: When it is necessary
      to reach to the conclusion regarding any fact relating to signature, finger
      impression, law of a foreign country, science, custom-tradition, art or any other
      similar subject, the court may cause to appear, the person who deserves special
      expertise, experience or training and examine him/her as a witness. In case an
      expert witness is so examined by the court, it has to provide opportunity to the
      parties to the case for cross examination of such witness pursuant to this Act.
53.   Court may ask necessary question with the witness: The court may ask any
      question, which deems it necessary, to the witness.


                                     CHAPTER-9
                                  MISCILLINIOUS
54.   Consequence of improper admission or rejection of evidence: The improper
      admission or rejection of evidence pursuant to this Act shall not be ground of itself
      from the reversal of any verdict (decision) or order of the court.
             Provided that, if the improper admission or rejection of evidence causes any
      effect in the decision such verdict (decision) or order shall be reversed.
55.   Saving: This Act shall not bar to pursue the proceedings and conclude a case using
      the evidence which has been already examined pursuant to the law in force before
      the commencement of this Act.
56.   Repeal: Number 148, 149, 151, 153, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 177, and 178 of the
      Chapter on Court Procedure Part-2 of the General Code (Muluki Ain) is, hereby,
      repealed.




                                             20
